GH Real Estate approved legal-source text chunk — GH-FED-01_Federal-Fair-Housing-HUD-Regulations_CURRENT.part-004.txt — verified through 2026-07-12. Official source text controls.

pursuing an action for disability discrimination under the Americans with Disabilities Act may
state a claim that “with a reasonable accommodation” she could perform the essential functions
of the job).
                                                  5
        Example 2: A deaf tenant asks his housing provider to allow him to install extra
electrical lines and a cable line so the tenant can use computer equipment that helps him
communicate with others. If the tenant’s disability is known, the housing provider may not
require him to document his disability; however, since the need for the electrical and cable lines
may not be apparent, the housing provider may request information that is necessary to support
the disability-related need for the requested modification.

8.     Who must comply with the Fair Housing Act’s reasonable modification
requirements?

        Any person or entity engaging in prohibited conduct – i.e., refusing to allow an
individual to make reasonable modifications when such modifications may be necessary to
afford a person with a disability full enjoyment of the premises – may be held liable unless they
fall within an exception to the Act’s coverage. Courts have applied the Act to individuals,
corporations, associations and others involved in the provision of housing and residential
lending, including property owners, housing managers, homeowners and condominium
associations, lenders, real estate agents, and brokerage services. Courts have also applied the
Act to state and local governments, most often in the context of exclusionary zoning or other
land-use decisions. See, e.g., City of Edmonds v. Oxford House, Inc., 514 U.S. 725, 729 (1995);
Project Life v. Glendening, 139 F. Supp. 2d 703, 710 (D. Md. 2001), aff’d, 2002 WL 2012545
(4th Cir. 2002).

9.     What is the difference between a reasonable accommodation and a reasonable
modification under the Fair Housing Act?9

        Under the Fair Housing Act, a reasonable modification is a structural change made to the
premises whereas a reasonable accommodation is a change, exception, or adjustment to a rule,
policy, practice, or service. A person with a disability may need either a reasonable
accommodation or a reasonable modification, or both, in order to have an equal opportunity to
use and enjoy a dwelling, including public and common use spaces. Generally, under the Fair
Housing Act, the housing provider is responsible for the costs associated with a reasonable
accommodation unless it is an undue financial and administrative burden, while the tenant or
someone acting on the tenant’s behalf, is responsible for costs associated with a reasonable
modification. See Reasonable Accommodation Statement, Questions 7 and 8.

       Example 1: Because of a mobility disability, a tenant wants to install grab bars in the
bathroom. This is a reasonable modification and must be permitted at the tenant’s expense.


9
  Housing providers that receive federal financial assistance are also subject to the requirements
of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of l973. 29 U.S.C. § 794. Section 504, and its
implementing regulations at 24 C.F.R. Part 8, prohibit discrimination based on disability, and
obligate housing providers to make and pay for structural changes to facilities, if needed as a
reasonable accommodation for applicants and tenants with disabilities, unless doing so poses an
undue financial and administrative burden. See Question 31.
                                                 6
       Example 2: Because of a hearing disability, a tenant wishes to install a peephole in her
door so she can see who is at the door before she opens it. This is a reasonable modification and
must be permitted at the tenant’s expense.

        Example 3: Because of a mobility disability, a tenant wants to install a ramp outside the
building in a common area. This is a reasonable modification and must be permitted at the
tenant’s expense. See also Questions 19, 20 and 21.

       Example 4: Because of a vision disability, a tenant requests permission to have a guide
dog reside with her in her apartment. The housing provider has a “no-pets” policy. This is a
request for a reasonable accommodation, and the housing provider must grant the
accommodation.

10.    Are reasonable modifications restricted to the interior of a dwelling?

        No. Reasonable modifications are not limited to the interior of a dwelling. Reasonable
modifications may also be made to public and common use areas such as widening entrances to
fitness centers or laundry rooms, or for changes to exteriors of dwelling units such as installing a
ramp at the entrance to a dwelling.

11.  Is a request for a parking space because of a physical disability a reasonable
accommodation or a reasonable modification?

        Courts have treated requests for parking spaces as requests for a reasonable
accommodation and have placed the responsibility for providing the parking space on the
housing provider, even if provision of an accessible or assigned parking space results in some
cost to the provider. For example, courts have required a housing provider to provide an
assigned space even though the housing provider had a policy of not assigning parking spaces or
had a waiting list for available parking. However, housing providers may not require persons
with disabilities to pay extra fees as a condition of receiving accessible parking spaces.

        Providing a parking accommodation could include creating signage, repainting markings,
redistributing spaces, or creating curb cuts. This list is not exhaustive.




12.    What if the structural changes being requested by the tenant or applicant are in a
building that is subject to the design and construction requirements of the Fair Housing
Act and the requested structural changes are a feature of accessible design that should
have already existed in the unit or common area, e.g., doorways wide enough to
accommodate a wheelchair, or an accessible entryway to a unit.


                                                 7
        The Fair Housing Act provides that covered multifamily dwellings built for first
occupancy after March 13, 1991, shall be designed and constructed to meet certain minimum
accessibility and adaptability standards. If any of the structural changes needed by the tenant are
ones that should have been included in the unit or public and common use area when constructed
then the housing provider may be responsible for providing and paying for those requested
structural changes. However, if the requested structural changes are not a feature of accessible
design that should have already existed in the building pursuant to the design and construction
requirements under the Act, then the tenant is responsible for paying for the cost of the structural
changes as a reasonable modification.

       Although the design and construction provisions only apply to certain multifamily
dwellings built for first occupancy since 1991, a tenant may request reasonable modifications to
housing built prior to that date. In such cases, the housing provider must allow the
modifications, and the tenant is responsible for paying for the costs under the Fair Housing Act.

       For a discussion of the design and construction requirements of the Act, and their
applicability, see HUD’s website at: www.hud.gov/offices/fheo/disabilities/index.cfm and the
Fair Housing Accessibility FIRST website at: http://www.fairhousingfirst.org.

        Example 1: A tenant with a disability who uses a wheelchair resides in a ground floor
apartment in a non-elevator building that was built in 1995. Buildings built for first occupancy
after March 13, 1991 are covered by the design and construction requirements of the Fair
Housing Act. Because the building is a non-elevator building, all ground floor units must meet
the minimum accessibility requirements of the Act. The doors in the apartment are not wide
enough for passage using a wheelchair in violation of the design and construction requirements
but can be made so through retrofitting. Under these circumstances, one federal court has held
that the tenant may have a potential claim against the housing provider.

       Example 2: A tenant with a disability resides in an apartment in a building that was built
in 1987. The doors in the unit are not wide enough for passage using a wheelchair but can be
made so through retrofitting. If the tenant meets the other requirements for obtaining a
modification, the tenant may widen the doorways, at her own expense.

        Example 3: A tenant with a disability resides in an apartment in a building that was built
in 1993 in compliance with the design and construction requirements of the Fair Housing Act.
The tenant wants to install grab bars in the bathroom because of her disability. Provided that the
tenant meets the other requirements for obtaining a modification, the tenant may install the grab
bars at her own expense.
13.     Who is responsible for expenses associated with a reasonable modification, e.g., for
upkeep or maintenance?

       The tenant is responsible for upkeep and maintenance of a modification that is used
exclusively by her. If a modification is made to a common area that is normally maintained by
the housing provider, then the housing provider is responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of
the modification. If a modification is made to a common area that is not normally maintained by
                                                 8
the housing provider, then the housing provider has no responsibility under the Fair Housing Act
to maintain the modification.

        Example 1: Because of a mobility disability, a tenant, at her own expense, installs a lift
inside her unit to allow her access to a second story. She is required to maintain the lift at her
expense because it is not in a common area.

        Example 2: Because of a mobility disability, a tenant installs a ramp in the lobby of a
multifamily building at her own expense. The ramp is used by other tenants and the public as
well as the tenant with the disability. The housing provider is responsible for maintaining the
ramp.

        Example 3: A tenant leases a detached, single-family home. Because of a mobility
disability, the tenant installs a ramp at the outside entrance to the home. The housing provider
provides no snow removal services, and the lease agreement specifically states that snow
removal is the responsibility of the individual tenant. Under these circumstances, the housing
provider has no responsibility under the Fair Housing Act to remove snow on the tenant’s ramp.
However, if the housing provider normally provides snow removal for the outside of the building
and the common areas, the housing provider is responsible for removing the snow from the ramp
as well.

14.    In addition to current residents, are prospective tenants and buyers of housing
protected by the reasonable modification provisions of the Fair Housing Act?

        Yes. A person may make a request for a reasonable modification at any time. An
individual may request a reasonable modification of the dwelling at the time that the potential
tenancy or purchase is discussed. Under the Act, a housing provider cannot deny or restrict
access to housing because a request for a reasonable modification is made. Such conduct would
constitute discrimination. The modification does not have to be made, however, unless it is
reasonable. See Questions 2, 16, 21 and 23.

15.    When and how should an individual request permission to make a modification?

        Under the Act, a resident or an applicant for housing makes a reasonable modification
request whenever she makes clear to the housing provider that she is requesting permission to
make a structural change to the premises because of her disability. She should explain that she
has a disability, if not readily apparent or not known to the housing provider, the type of
modification she is requesting, and the relationship between the requested modification and her
disability.

        An applicant or resident is not entitled to receive a reasonable modification unless she
requests one. However, the Fair Housing Act does not require that a request be made in a
particular manner or at a particular time. A person with a disability need not personally make
the reasonable modification request; the request can be made by a family member or someone
else who is acting on her behalf. An individual making a reasonable modification request does
                                                 9
not need to mention the Act or use the words “reasonable modification.” However, the requester
must make the request in a manner that a reasonable person would understand to be a request for
permission to make a structural change because of a disability.

        Although a reasonable modification request can be made orally or in writing, it is usually
helpful for both the resident and the housing provider if the request is made in writing. This will
help prevent misunderstandings regarding what is being requested, or whether the request was
made. To facilitate the processing and consideration of the request, residents or prospective
residents may wish to check with a housing provider in advance to determine if the provider has
a preference regarding the manner in which the request is made. However, housing providers
must give appropriate consideration to reasonable modification requests even if the requester
makes the request orally or does not use the provider's preferred forms or procedures for making
such requests.

16.   Does a person with a disability have to have the housing provider’s approval before
making a reasonable modification to the dwelling?

       Yes. A person with a disability must have the housing provider’s approval before
making the modification. However, if the person with a disability meets the requirements under
the Act for a reasonable modification and provides the relevant documents and assurances, the
housing provider cannot deny the request.

17.   What if the housing provider fails to act promptly on a reasonable modification
request?

        A provider has an obligation to provide prompt responses to a reasonable modification
request. An undue delay in responding to a reasonable modification request may be deemed a
failure to permit a reasonable modification.

18.     What if the housing provider proposes that the tenant move to a different unit in
lieu of making a proposed modification?

       The housing provider cannot insist that a tenant move to a different unit in lieu of
allowing the tenant to make a modification that complies with the requirements for reasonable
modifications. See Questions 2, 21 and 23. Housing providers should be aware that persons
with disabilities typically have the most accurate knowledge regarding the functional limitations
posed by their disability.

        Example: As a result of a mobility disability, a tenant requests that he be permitted, at
his expense, to install a ramp so that he can access his apartment using his motorized wheelchair.
The existing entrance to his dwelling is not wheelchair accessible because the route to the front
door requires going up a step. The housing provider proposes that in lieu of installing the ramp,
the tenant move to a different unit in the building. The tenant is not obligated to accept the
alternative proposed by the housing provider, as his request to modify his unit is reasonable and
must be approved.
                                                10
19.    What if the housing provider wants an alternative modification or alternative
design for the proposed modification that does not cost more but that the housing provider
considers more aesthetically pleasing?

         In general, the housing provider cannot insist on an alternative modification or an
alternative design if the tenant complies with the requirements for reasonable modifications. See
Questions 2, 21 and 23. If the modification is to the interior of the unit and must be restored to
its original condition when the tenant moves out, then the housing provider cannot require that
its design be used instead of the tenant’s design. However, if the modification is to a common
area or an aspect of the interior of the unit that would not have to be restored because it would
not be reasonable to do so, and if the housing provider’s proposed design imposes no additional
costs and still meets the tenant’s needs, then the modification should be done in accordance with
the housing provider’s design. See Question 24 for a discussion of the restoration requirements.

        Example 1: As a result of a mobility disability, a tenant requests that he be permitted, at
his expense, to install a ramp so that he can access his apartment using his motorized wheelchair.
The existing entrance to his dwelling is not wheelchair accessible because the route to the front
door requires going up a step. The housing provider proposes an alternative design for a ramp
but the alternative design costs more and does not meet the tenant’s needs. The tenant is not
obligated to accept the alternative modification, as his request to modify his unit is reasonable
and must be approved.

        Example 2: As a result of a mobility disability, a tenant requests permission to widen a
doorway to allow passage with her wheelchair. All of the doorways in the unit are trimmed with
a decorative trim molding that does not cost any more than the standard trim molding. Because
in usual circumstances it would not be reasonable to require that the doorway be restored at the
end of the tenancy, the tenant should use the decorative trim when he widens the doorway.

20.   What if the housing provider wants a more costly design for the requested
modification?

        If the housing provider wishes a modification to be made with more costly materials, in
order to satisfy the landlord’s aesthetic standards, the tenant must agree only if the housing
provider pays those additional costs. Further, as discussed in Questions 21 and 23 below,
housing providers may require that the tenant obtain all necessary building permits and may
require that the work be performed in a workmanlike manner. If the housing provider requires
more costly materials be used to satisfy her workmanship preferences beyond the requirements
of the applicable local codes, the tenant must agree only if the housing provider pays for those
additional costs as well. In such a case, however, the housing provider’s design must still meet
the tenant’s needs.

21.   What types of documents and assurances may a housing provider require regarding
the modification before granting the reasonable modification?

                                                11
        A housing provider may require that a request for a reasonable modification include a
description of the proposed modification both before changes are made to the dwelling and
before granting the modification. A description of the modification to be made may be provided
to a housing provider either orally or in writing depending on the extent and nature of the
proposed modification. A housing provider may also require that the tenant obtain any building
permits needed to make the modifications, and that the work be performed in a workmanlike
manner.

        The regulations implementing the Fair Housing Act state that housing providers
generally cannot impose conditions on a proposed reasonable modification. For example, a
housing provider cannot require that the tenant obtain additional insurance or increase the
security deposit as a condition that must be met before the modification will be allowed.
However, the Preamble to the Final Regulations also indicates that there are some conditions that
can be placed on a tenant requesting a reasonable modification. For example, in certain limited
and narrow circumstances, a housing provider may require that the tenant deposit money into an
interest bearing account to ensure that funds are available to restore the interior of a dwelling to
its previous state, ordinary wear and tear excepted. Imposing conditions not contemplated by the
Fair Housing Act and its implementing regulations may be the same as an illegal refusal to
permit the modification.

22.   May a housing provider or homeowner’s association condition approval of the
requested modification on the requester obtaining special liability insurance?

       No. Imposition of such a requirement would constitute a violation of the Fair Housing
Act.

        Example: Because of a mobility disability, a tenant wants to install a ramp outside his
unit. The housing provider informs the tenant that the ramp may be installed, but only after the
tenant obtains separate liability insurance for the ramp out of concern for the housing provider’s
potential liability. The housing provider may not impose a requirement of liability insurance as a
condition of approval of the ramp.

23.    Once the housing provider has agreed to a reasonable modification, may she insist
that a particular contractor be used to perform the work?

       No. The housing provider cannot insist that a particular contractor do the work. The
housing provider may only require that whoever does the work is reasonably able to complete
the work in a workmanlike manner and obtain all necessary building permits.

24.    If a person with a disability has made reasonable modifications to the interior of the
dwelling, must she restore all of them when she moves out?

       The tenant is obligated to restore those portions of the interior of the dwelling to their
previous condition only where “it is reasonable to do so” and where the housing provider has
requested the restoration. The tenant is not responsible for expenses associated with reasonable
                                                12
wear and tear. In general, if the modifications do not affect the housing provider’s or subsequent
tenant’s use or enjoyment of the premises, the tenant cannot be required to restore the
modifications to their prior state. A housing provider may choose to keep the modifications in
place at the end of the tenancy. See also Question 28.

        Example 1: Because the tenant uses a wheelchair, she obtained permission from her
housing provider to remove the base cabinets and lower the kitchen sink to provide for greater
accessibility. It is reasonable for the housing provider to ask the tenant to replace the cabinets
and raise the sink back to its original height.

        Example 2: Because of a mobility disability, a tenant obtained approval from the
housing provider to install grab bars in the bathroom. As part of the installation, the contractor
had to construct reinforcements on the underside of the wall. These reinforcements are not
visible and do not detract from the use of the apartment. It is reasonable for the housing provider
to require the tenant to remove the grab bars, but it is not reasonable for the housing provider to
require the tenant to remove the reinforcements.

       Example 3: Because of a mobility disability, a tenant obtained approval from the
housing provider to widen doorways to allow him to maneuver in his wheelchair. In usual
circumstances, it is not reasonable for the housing provider to require him to restore the
doorways to their prior width.

25.    Of the reasonable modifications made to the interior of a dwelling that must be
restored, must the person with a disability pay to make those restorations when she moves
out?

        Yes. Reasonable restorations of the dwelling required as a result of modifications made
to the interior of the dwelling must be paid for by the tenant unless the next occupant of the
dwelling wants to retain the reasonable modifications and where it is reasonable to do so, the
next occupant is willing to establish a new interest bearing escrow account. The subsequent
tenant would have to restore the modifications to the prior condition at the end of his tenancy if it
is reasonable to do so and if requested by the housing provider. See also Question 24.

26.   If a person with a disability has made a reasonable modification to the exterior of
the dwelling, or a common area, must she restore it to its original condition when she
moves out?

        No. The Fair Housing Act expressly provides that housing providers may only require
restoration of modifications made to interiors of the dwelling at the end of the tenancy.
Reasonable modifications such as ramps to the front door of the dwelling or modifications made
to laundry rooms or building entrances are not required to be restored.

27.    May a housing provider increase or require a person with a disability to pay a
security deposit if she requests a reasonable modification?

                                                 13
        No. The housing provider may not require an increased security deposit as the result of a
request for a reasonable modification, nor may a housing provider require a tenant to pay a
security deposit when one is not customarily required. However, a housing provider may be able
to take other steps to ensure that money will be available to pay for restoration of the interior of
the premises at the end of the tenancy. See Questions 21 and 28.

28.    May a housing provider take other steps to ensure that money will be available to
pay for restoration of the interior of the premises at the end of the tenancy?

        Where it is necessary in order to ensure with reasonable certainty that funds will be
available to pay for the restorations at the end of the tenancy, the housing provider may negotiate
with the tenant as part of a restoration agreement a provision that requires the tenant to make
payments into an interest-bearing escrow account. A housing provider may not routinely require
that tenants place money in escrow accounts when a modification is sought. Both the amount
and the terms of the escrow payment are subject to negotiation between the housing provider and
the tenant.

        Simply because an individual has a disability does not mean that she is less creditworthy
than an individual without a disability. The decision to require that money be placed in an
escrow account should be based on the following factors: 1) the extent and nature of the
proposed modifications; 2) the expected duration of the lease; 3) the credit and tenancy history
of the individual tenant; and 4) other information that may bear on the risk to the housing
provider that the premises will not be restored.

        If the housing provider decides to require payment into an escrow account, the amount of
money to be placed in the account cannot exceed the cost of restoring the modifications, and the
period of time during which the tenant makes payment into the escrow account must be
reasonable. Although a housing provider may require that funds be placed in escrow, it does not
automatically mean that the full amount of money needed to make the future restorations can be
required to be paid at the time that the modifications are sought. In addition, it is important to
note that interest from the account accrues to the benefit of the tenant. If an escrow account is
established, and the housing provider later decides not to have the unit restored, then all funds in
the account, including the interest, must be promptly returned to the tenant.

       Example 1: Because of a mobility disability, a tenant requests a reasonable
modification. The modification includes installation of grab bars in the bathroom. The tenant
has an excellent credit history and has lived in the apartment for five years before becoming
disabled. Under these circumstances, it may not be reasonable to require payment into an
escrow account.

       Example 2: Because of a mobility disability, a new tenant with a poor credit history
wants to lower the kitchen cabinets to a more accessible height. It may be reasonable for the
housing provider to require payment into an interest bearing escrow account to ensure that funds
are available for restoration.

                                                 14
        Example 3: A housing provider requires all tenants with disabilities to pay a set sum
into an interest bearing escrow account before approving any request for a reasonable
modification. The amount required by the housing provider has no relationship to the actual cost
of the restoration. This type of requirement violates the Fair Housing Act.

29.    What if a person with a disability moves into a rental unit and wants the carpet
taken up because her wheelchair does not move easily across carpeting? Is that a
reasonable accommodation or modification?

      Depending on the circumstances, removal of carpeting may be either a reasonable
accommodation or a reasonable modification.

        Example 1: If the housing provider has a practice of not permitting a tenant to change
flooring in a unit and there is a smooth, finished floor underneath the carpeting, generally,
allowing the tenant to remove the carpet would be a reasonable accommodation.

        Example 2: If there is no finished flooring underneath the carpeting, generally,
removing the carpeting and installing a finished floor would be a reasonable modification that
would have to be done at the tenant’s expense. If the finished floor installed by the tenant does
not affect the housing provider’s or subsequent tenant’s use or enjoyment of the premises, the
tenant would not have to restore the carpeting at the conclusion of the tenancy. See Questions 24
and 25.

       Example 3: If the housing provider has a practice of replacing the carpeting before a
new tenant moves in, and there is an existing smooth, finished floor underneath, then it would be
a reasonable accommodation of his normal practice of installing new carpeting for the housing
provider to just take up the old carpeting and wait until the tenant with a mobility disability
moves out to put new carpeting down.

30.    Who is responsible for paying for the costs of structural changes to a dwelling unit
that has not yet been constructed if a purchaser with a disability needs different or
additional features to make the unit meet her disability-related needs?

        If the dwelling unit is not subject to the design and construction requirements (i.e., a
detached single family home or a multi-story townhouse without an elevator), then the purchaser
is responsible for the additional costs associated with the structural changes. The purchaser is
responsible for any additional cost that the structural changes might create over and above what
the original design would have cost.

       If the unit being purchased is subject to the design and construction requirements of the
Fair Housing Act, then all costs associated with incorporating the features required by the Act
are borne by the builder. If a purchaser with a disability needs different or additional features
added to a unit under construction or about to be constructed beyond those already required by
the Act, and it would cost the builder more to provide the requested features, the structural
changes would be considered a reasonable modification and the additional costs would have to
                                                15
be borne by the purchaser. The purchaser is responsible for any additional cost that the
structural changes might create over and above what the original design would have cost.

        Example 1: A buyer with a mobility disability is purchasing a single family dwelling
under construction and asks for a bathroom sink with a floorless base cabinet with retractable
doors that allows the buyer to position his wheelchair under the sink. If the cabinet costs more
than the standard vanity cabinet provided by the builder, the buyer is responsible for the
additional cost, not the full cost of the requested cabinet. If, however, the alternative cabinet
requested by the buyer costs less than or the same as the one normally provided by the builder,
and the installation costs are also the same or less, then the builder should install the requested
cabinet without any additional cost to the buyer.

        Example 2: A buyer with a mobility disability is purchasing a ground floor unit in a
detached townhouse that is designed with a concrete step at the front door. The buyer requests
that the builder grade the entrance to eliminate the need for the step. If the cost of providing the
at-grade entrance is no greater than the cost of building the concrete step, then the builder would
have to provide the at-grade entrance without additional charge to the purchaser.

        Example 3: A buyer with a mobility disability is purchasing a unit that is subject to the
design and construction requirements of the Fair Housing Act. The buyer wishes to have grab
bars installed in the unit as a reasonable modification to the bathroom. The builder is
responsible for installing and paying for the wall reinforcements for the grab bars because these
reinforcements are required under the design and construction provisions of the Act. The buyer
is responsible for the costs of installing and paying for the grab bars.



31.    Are the rules the same if a person with a disability lives in housing that receives
federal financial assistance and the needed structural changes to the unit or common area
are the result of the tenant having a disability?

        Housing that receives federal financial assistance is covered by both the Fair Housing
Act and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Under regulations implementing Section
504, structural changes needed by an applicant or resident with a disability in housing receiving
federal financial assistance are considered reasonable accommodations. They must be paid for
by the housing provider unless providing them would be an undue financial and administrative
burden or a fundamental alteration of the program or unless the housing provider can
accommodate the individual’s needs through other means. Housing that receives federal
financial assistance and that is provided by state or local entities may also be covered by Title II
of the Americans with Disabilities Act.

        Example 1: A tenant who uses a wheelchair and who lives in privately owned housing
needs a roll-in shower in order to bathe independently. Under the Fair Housing Act the tenant
would be responsible for the costs of installing the roll-in shower as a reasonable modification to
his unit.
                                                 16
        Example 2: A tenant who uses a wheelchair and who lives in housing that receives
federal financial assistance needs a roll-in shower in order to bathe independently. Under
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the housing provider would be obligated to pay
for and install the roll-in shower as a reasonable accommodation to the tenant unless doing so
was an undue financial and administrative burden or unless the housing provider could meet the
tenant’s disability-related needs by transferring the tenant to another appropriate unit that
contains a roll-in shower.

     HUD has provided more detailed information about Section 504’s requirements. See
www.hud.gov/offices/fheo/disabilities/sect504.cfm.

32.   If a person believes that she has been unlawfully denied a reasonable modification,
what should that person do if she wants to challenge that denial under the Act?

         When a person with a disability believes that she has been subjected to a discriminatory
housing practice, including a provider’s wrongful denial of a request for a reasonable
modification, she may file a complaint with HUD within one year after the alleged denial or may
file a lawsuit in federal district court within two years of the alleged denial. If a complaint is
filed, HUD will investigate the complaint at no cost to the person with a disability.

       There are several ways that a person may file a complaint with HUD:

               •   By placing a toll-free call to 1-800-669-9777 or TTY 1-800-927-9275;

               •   By completing the “on-line” complaint form available on the HUD internet
                   site: http://www.hud.gov; or

               •   By mailing a completed complaint form or letter to:

                      Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity
                      Department of Housing & Urban Development
                      451 Seventh Street, S.W., Room 5204
                      Washington, DC 20410-2000

        Upon request, HUD will provide printed materials in alternate formats (large print, audio
tapes, or Braille) and provide complainants with assistance in reading and completing forms.

        The Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department brings lawsuits in federal courts
across the country to end discriminatory practices and to seek monetary and other relief for
individuals whose rights under the Fair Housing Act have been violated. The Civil Rights
Division initiates lawsuits when it has reason to believe that a person or entity is involved in a
“pattern or practice” of discrimination or when there has been a denial of rights to a group of
persons that raises an issue of general public importance. The Division also participates as
amicus curiae in federal court cases that raise important legal questions involving the application
                                                17
and/or interpretation of the Act. To alert the Justice Department to matters involving a pattern or
practice of discrimination, matters involving the denial of rights to groups of persons, or lawsuits
raising issues that may be appropriate for amicus participation, contact:

                       U.S. Department of Justice
                       Civil Rights Division
                       Housing and Civil Enforcement Section – G St.
                       950 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
                       Washington, DC 20530

        For more information on the types of housing discrimination cases handled by the Civil
Rights Division, please refer to the Housing and Civil Enforcement Section’s website at
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/housing/hcehome.html.

         A HUD or Department of Justice decision not to proceed with a Fair Housing Act matter
does not foreclose private plaintiffs from pursuing a private lawsuit. However, litigation can be
an expensive, time-consuming, and uncertain process for all parties. HUD and the Department
of Justice encourage parties to Fair Housing Act disputes to explore all reasonable alternatives to
litigation, including alternative dispute resolution procedures, such as mediation. HUD attempts
to conciliate all Fair Housing Act complaints. In addition, it is the Department of Justice’s
policy to offer prospective defendants the opportunity to engage in pre-suit settlement
negotiations, except in the most unusual circumstances.




                                                 18
    Consolidated HUD Fair Housing Act Administrative
                     Proceedings
 Citation: 24 C.F.R. part 180

 Authority: Tier 1 — binding federal regulation

 Applicability / trigger: Triggered by administrative adjudication of a Fair Housing Act charge; useful for litigation procedure
 and sanctions.

 Source: https://www.ecfr.gov/api/versioner/v1/full/2026-07-09/title-24.xml?part=180

 Currentness: Official eCFR versioned XML as of 2026-07-09; retrieved 2026-07-12.

 Retrieved: 2026-07-12



 This is a searchable rendering of an official source. It is not legal advice. The official source controls, and current law must be
 rechecked before action.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                             Page 1
 PART 180—CONSOLIDATED HUD HEARING PROCEDURES FOR CIVIL
 RIGHTS MATTERS
 Authority: 28 U.S.C. 1 note; 29 U.S.C. 794; 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1, 3535(d), 3601-3619, 5301-5320, and 6103.
 Source: 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, unless otherwise noted.

 Subpart A—General Information
 § 180.100 Definitions.
 As used in this part:
 (a) The terms ALJ, Department, Fair Housing Act, General Counsel, and HUD are defined in 24 CFR part 5, subpart A.
 (b) The terms Aggrieved Person, Assistant Secretary, Attorney General, Discriminatory Housing Practice, Person, and State are defined in 24
 CFR part 103, subpart A.
 (c) Other terms used in this part are defined as follows:
 Agency has the same meaning as HUD.
 Applicant and Application have the meanings provided in 24 CFR 1.2 or 24 CFR 8.3, as applicable.
 Charge means the statement of facts issued under 24 CFR 103.405 upon which HUD has found reasonable cause to believe that a discriminatory
 housing practice has occurred or is about to occur.
 Complaint means a complaint filed under the statutes covered by this part.
 Complainant means the person (including the Assistant Secretary) who filed a complaint under the statutes covered by this part.
 Docket Clerk is the docket clerk for HUD's Office of Hearings and Appeals, 451 7th Street, SW., Room B-133, Washington, DC 20410. The
 telephone number is 202-254-0000 and the facsimile number is 202-619-7304.
 Fair Housing Act matters refers to proceedings under this part pursuant to the Fair Housing Act and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR parts
 100 and 103.
 Federal financial assistance has the meaning provided in 24 CFR 1.2, 6.3, 8.3, or 146.7, as applicable.
 Hearing means a trial-type proceeding that involves the submission of evidence, either by oral presentation or written submission, and briefs and
 oral arguments on the evidence and applicable law.
 Intervenor is a person entitled by law or permitted by the ALJ to participate as a party.
 Non-Fair Housing Act matters refers to proceedings under this part pursuant to:
 (1) Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 2000d-1) and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 1;
 (2) Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, (29 U.S.C. 794) and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 8;
 (3) The Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 6103) and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 146; or
 (4) Section 109 of Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 5301-5321) and the implementing
 regulations at 24 CFR part 6.
 Notice of Proposed Adverse Action is the statement of facts issued pursuant to a non-Fair Housing Act matter upon which HUD has found reason
 to terminate or refuse to grant or continue Federal financial assistance.
 Party is a person who has full participation rights in a proceeding under this part.
 Prevailing party has the same meaning as the term has in section 722 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 U.S.C. 1988).
 Recipient has the meaning provided in 24 CFR 1.2, 6.3, 8.3, or 146.7, as applicable.
 Respondent means the person accused of violating one of the statutes covered by this part, including a recipient.
 Secretary means the Secretary of HUD, or to the extent of any delegation of authority by the Secretary to act under any of the statutory authorities
 listed in § 180.105(a), any other HUD official to whom the Secretary may hereafter delegate such authority.
 [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 3801, Jan. 25, 1999; 72 FR 53879, Sept. 20, 2007; 74 FR 4635, Jan. 26, 2009]

 § 180.105 Scope of rules.
 (a) This part contains the rules of practice and procedure applicable to administrative proceedings before an ALJ under the following authorities:


GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                           Page 2
 (1) The Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. 3601-3619) and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR parts 100 and 103, where no election to proceed in
 federal district court has been made;
 (2) Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-1), and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 1;
 (3) Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C. 794), and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 8;
 (4) The Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6103), and the implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 146; and
 (5) Section 109 of title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5301-5321) and implementing regulations at 24
 CFR part 6.
 (b) In the absence of a specific provision, the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure shall serve as a general guide.
 (c) Hearings under this part shall be conducted as expeditiously and inexpensively as possible, consistent with the needs and rights of the parties
 to obtain a fair hearing and a complete record.
 (d) Except to the extent that a waiver would otherwise be contrary to law, the ALJ may, after adequate notice to all interested persons, modify or
 waive any of the rules in this part upon a determination that no person will be prejudiced and that the ends of justice will be served.
 (e) All pleadings, correspondence, exhibits, transcripts of testimony, exceptions, briefs, decisions, and other documents filed in any proceeding
 may be inspected in the Docket Clerk's office during regular business hours.
 [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 3801, Jan. 25, 1999; 74 FR 4636, Jan. 26, 2009]

 Subpart B—Administrative Law Judge
 § 180.200 Designation.
 Proceedings under this part shall be presided over by an ALJ appointed under 5 U.S.C. 3105.
 [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 73 FR 13723, Mar. 13, 2008]

 § 180.205 Authority.
 The ALJ shall have all powers necessary to conduct fair, expeditious and impartial hearings, including the power to:
 (a) Administer oaths and affirmations and examine witnesses;
 (b) Rule on offers of proof and receive evidence;
 (c) Take depositions or have depositions taken when the ends of justice would be served;
 (d) Regulate the course of the hearing and the conduct of persons at the hearing;
 (e) Hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of the issues by consent of the parties;
 (f) Rule on motions, procedural requests, and similar matters;
 (g) Make and issue initial decisions;
 (h) Impose appropriate sanctions against any person failing to obey an order, refusing to adhere to reasonable standards of orderly and ethical
 conduct, or refusing to act in good faith;
 (i) Issue subpoenas if authorized by law; and
 (j) Exercise any other powers necessary and appropriate for the purpose and conduct of the proceeding as authorized by the rules in this part or in
 conformance with statute, including 5 U.S.C. 551-59.

 § 180.210 Withdrawal or disqualification of ALJ.
 (a) Disqualification. If an ALJ finds that there is a basis for his/her disqualification in a proceeding, the ALJ shall withdraw from the proceeding.
 Withdrawal is accomplished by entering a notice in the record and providing a copy of the notice to the Chief Administrative Law Judge.
 (b) Motion for recusal. If a party believes that the presiding ALJ should be disqualified for any reason, the party may file a motion to recuse with
 the ALJ. The motion shall be supported by an affidavit setting forth the alleged grounds for disqualification. The ALJ shall rule on the motion,
 stating the grounds therefor.
 (c) Redesignation of ALJ. If an ALJ is disqualified, another ALJ shall be designated to preside over further proceedings.
 [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 73 FR 13723, Mar. 13, 2008; 87 FR 8197, Feb. 14, 2022]




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 3
 § 180.215 Ex parte communications.
 (a) An ex parte communication is any direct or indirect communication concerning the merits of a pending proceeding, made by a party in the
 absence of any other party, to the presiding ALJ, and which was neither on the record nor on reasonable prior notice to all parties. Ex parte
 communications do not include communications made for the sole purpose of scheduling hearings, requesting extensions of time, or requesting
 information on the status of cases.
 (b) Ex parte communications are prohibited.
 (c) If the ALJ receives an ex parte communication that the ALJ knows or has reason to believe is prohibited, the ALJ shall promptly place the
 communication, or a written statement of the substance of the communication, in the record and shall furnish copies to all parties. Unauthorized
 communications shall not be taken into consideration in deciding any matter in issue. Any party making a prohibited ex parte communication
 may be subject to sanctions including, but not limited to, exclusion from the proceeding and an adverse ruling on the issue that is the subject of
 the prohibited communication.

 § 180.220 Separation of functions.
 No officer, employee, or agent of the Federal Government engaged in the performance of investigative, conciliatory, or prosecutorial functions in
 connection with the proceeding shall, in that proceeding or any factually related proceeding under this part, participate or advise in the decision of
 the ALJ, except as a witness or counsel during the proceedings or in its appellate review.

 Subpart C—Parties
 § 180.300 Rights of parties.
 Each party may appear in person, be represented by counsel, examine or cross-examine witnesses, introduce documentary or other relevant
 evidence into the record and, in Fair Housing Act matters, request the issuance of subpoenas.

 § 180.305 Representation.
 (a) HUD is represented by the General Counsel.
 (b) Any party may appear on his/her/its own behalf or by an attorney. Each party or attorney shall file a notice of appearance. The notice must
 identify the matter before the ALJ, the party on whose behalf the appearance is made, and the mailing address and telephone number of the
 person appearing. Similar notice shall also be given for any withdrawal of appearance.
 (c) An attorney must be admitted to practice before a Federal Court or the highest court in any State. The attorney's representation that he/she is in
 good standing before any of these courts is sufficient evidence of the attorney's qualifications under this section, unless otherwise ordered by the
 ALJ.

 § 180.310 Parties.
 (a) Parties to proceedings under this part are HUD, the respondent(s), and any intervenors. Respondents include persons named as such in a
 charge issued under 24 CFR part 103 and Recipients/applicants named as respondents in hearing notices issued under 24 CFR parts 1, 6, 8 or 146
 and notices of proposed adverse action under this part.
 (b) An aggrieved person is not a party but may file a motion to intervene. Requests for intervention shall be filed within 50 days after the filing of
 the charge; however, the ALJ may allow intervention beyond that time. An intervenor's right to participate as a party may be restricted by order of
 the ALJ pursuant to statute, the rules in this part or other applicable law. Intervention shall be permitted if the person requesting intervention is
 (1) The aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge is issued; or
 (2) An aggrieved person who claims an interest in the property or transaction that is the subject of the charge and the disposition of the charge
 may, as a practical matter, impair or impede this person's ability to protect that interest, unless the aggrieved person is adequately represented by
 the existing parties.
 (c) A complainant in a non-Fair Housing Act matter is not a party but may file a motion to become an amicus curiae.
 (d) Any person may file a petition to participate in a proceeding under this part as an amicus curiae. An amicus curiae is not a party to the
 proceeding and may not introduce evidence at the hearing.
 (1) A petition to participate as amicus curiae shall be filed before the commencement of the hearing, unless the petitioner shows good cause for
 filing the petition later. The petition may be granted if the ALJ finds that the petitioner has a legitimate interest in the proceedings, and that such
 participation will not unduly delay the outcome and may contribute materially to the proper disposition thereof.
 (2) The amicus curiae may submit briefs within time limits set by the ALJ or by the Secretary in the event of an appeal to the Secretary.
 (3) When all parties have completed their initial examination of a witness, the amicus curiae may request the ALJ to propound specific questions
 to the witness. Any such request may be granted if the ALJ believes the proposed additional testimony may assist materially in elucidating factual
 matters at issue between the parties and will not expand the issues.


GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                                Page 4
 [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 3801, Jan. 25, 1999]

 § 180.315 Standards of conduct.
 (a) All persons appearing in proceedings under this part shall act with integrity and in an ethical manner.
 (b) The ALJ may exclude parties or their representatives for refusal to comply with directions, continued use of dilatory tactics, refusal to adhere
 to reasonable standards of orderly and ethical conduct, failure to act in good faith, or violations of the prohibitions against ex parte
 communications. An attorney who is suspended or barred from participation may appeal to another ALJ designated by the Chief Administrative
 Law Judge. The proceeding will not be delayed or suspended pending disposition on the appeal, except that the ALJ shall suspend the proceeding
 for a reasonable time to enable the party to obtain another attorney.
 [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 73 FR 13723, Mar. 13, 2008; 87 FR 8197, Feb. 14, 2022]

 Subpart D—Proceedings Prior to Hearing
 § 180.400 Service and filing.
 (a) Service —(1) Service by the Office of Hearings and Appeals. The Office of Hearings and Appeals shall serve all notices, orders, decisions and
 other such documents by mail to each party and amicus curiae at the last known address.
 (2) Service by others. A copy of each filed document shall be served on each party and each amicus curiae. Service shall be made upon counsel if
 a party is represented by counsel. Service on counsel shall constitute service on the party. Service may be made to the last known address by
 first-class mail or other more expeditious means, such as:
 (i) Hand delivery to the person to be served or a person of suitable age and discretion at the place of business, residence, or usual place of abode
 of the person to be served;
 (ii) Overnight delivery; or
 (iii) Facsimile transmission or electronic means. The ALJ may place appropriate limits on service by facsimile transmission or electronic means.
 (3) Certificate of service. Every document served shall be accompanied by a certificate of service containing a statement as to the date of service,
 the method of service, the parties served and the address at which they were served, which is signed and dated by the person making service.
 (b) Filing —(1) Method. All documents shall be filed with the Docket Clerk. Filing may be by first class mail, delivery, facsimile transmission, or
 electronic means; however, the ALJ may place appropriate limits on filing by facsimile transmission or electronic means.
 (2) Form. Every pleading, motion, brief, or other document shall contain a caption setting forth the title of the proceeding, the docket number
 assigned by the Office of Hearings and Appeals, and the designation of the type of document (e.g., charge, motion).
 (3) Signature. Every document filed by a party shall be signed by the party or the party's attorney and must include the signer's address and
 telephone number. The signature constitutes a certification that: the signer has read the document; to the best of the signer's knowledge,
 information and belief, the statements made therein are true; and the document is not interposed for delay.
 [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 74 FR 4636, Jan. 26, 2009; 87 FR 8197, Feb. 14, 2022]

 § 180.405 Time computations.
 (a) In computing time under this part, the time period begins the day following the act, event, or default and includes the last day of the period,
 unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday observed by the Federal Government, in which case the time period includes the next
 business day.
 (b) Modification of time periods. Except for time periods required by statute, the ALJ may enlarge or reduce any time period required under this
 part where necessary to avoid prejudicing the public interest or the rights of the parties. Requests for extension of time should set forth the
 reasons for the request.
 (c) Entry of orders. In computing any time period involving the date of the ALJ's issuance of an order or decision, the date of issuance is the date
 of service by the Docket Clerk.
 (d) Computation of time for delivery by mail. When documents are filed by mail, three days shall be added to the prescribed time period for filing
 any responsive pleading. Documents are not filed until received by the Docket Clerk.
 (e) Untimely filing. The ALJ may refuse to consider any motion or other document that is not filed in a timely fashion.
 [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 74 FR 4636, Jan. 26, 2009]

 § 180.410 Charges under the Fair Housing Act.
 (a) Filing and service. Within 3 days after the issuance of a charge, the General Counsel shall file the charge with the Docket Clerk and serve
 copies (with the additional information required under paragraph (b) of this section) on all respondents and aggrieved persons.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 5
 (b) Contents. The charge shall consist of a short and plain written statement of the facts upon which reasonable cause has been found to believe
 that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur. A notification shall be served with the charge containing the following
 information:
 (1) Any complainant, respondent, or aggrieved person may elect to have the claims asserted in the charge decided in a civil action under 42
 U.S.C. 3612(o), in lieu of an administrative proceeding under this part.
 (2) Such election must be made not later than 20 days after receipt of service of the charge by serving written notice of such on the Docket Clerk,
 each respondent, each aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge was issued, the Assistant Secretary, and the General Counsel.
 (3) If no person timely elects to have the claims asserted in the charge decided in a civil action under 42 U.S.C. 3612(o), an administrative
 proceeding will be conducted under this part.
 (4) If an administrative hearing is conducted:
 (i) The hearing will be held at a date and place specified.
 (ii) The respondent will have an opportunity to file an answer to the charge within 30 days after service of the charge.
 (iii) The aggrieved person may participate as a party to the administrative proceeding by filing a request for intervention within 50 days after
 service of the charge.
 (iv) All discovery must be concluded 15 days before the date set for hearing.
 (v) The rules in this part will govern the proceeding.
 (5) If, at any time following service of the charge on the respondent, the respondent intends to enter into a contract, sale, encumbrance, or lease
 with any person regarding the property that is the subject of the charge, the respondent must provide a copy of the charge to such person before
 the respondent and the person enter into the contract, sale, encumbrance or lease.
 (c) Election of judicial determination. If the complainant, the respondent, or the aggrieved person on whose behalf a complaint was filed makes a
 timely election to have the claims asserted in the charge decided in a civil action under 42 U.S.C. 3612(o), the administrative proceeding shall be
 dismissed.
 (d) Effect of a civil action on administrative proceeding. An ALJ may not continue an administrative proceeding under the Fair Housing Act after
 the beginning of the trial of a civil action commenced by the aggrieved person under an act of Congress or a State law seeking relief with respect
 to that discriminatory housing practice. If such a trial is commenced, the ALJ shall dismiss the administrative proceeding. The commencement
 and maintenance of a civil action for appropriate temporary or preliminary relief under 42 U.S.C. 3610(e) or 42 U.S.C. 3613 does not affect
 administrative proceedings under this part.
 [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 73 FR 13723, Mar. 13, 2008; 74 FR 4636, Jan. 26, 2009]

 § 180.415 Notice of proposed adverse action regarding Federal financial assistance in non-Fair Housing Act
 matters.
 (a) Filing and service. Within 10 days after a recipient/applicant has requested a hearing, as provided for in 24 CFR parts 1, 6, 8, or 146, the
 General Counsel shall file a notice of proposed adverse action with the Docket Clerk and serve copies (with the additional information required
 under paragraph (b) of this section) on all respondents and complainants.
 (b) Contents. The notice of proposed adverse action shall consist of a short and plain written statement of the facts and legal authority upon which
 the proposed action is based. A notification shall be served with the notice containing the following information:
 (1) That an administrative hearing will be held at a date and place specified.
 (2) That the respondent will have an opportunity to file an answer to the notice of adverse action within 30 days after its service.
 (3) That the complainant may participate as an amicus curiae by filing a timely request to do so.
 (4) That discovery must be concluded by a date specified.
 (5) That the rules specified in this part shall govern the proceeding.
 (c) Consolidation. The ALJ may provide for non-Fair Housing Act proceedings at HUD to be joined or consolidated for hearing with proceedings
 in other Federal departments or agencies, by agreement with such other departments or agencies. All parties to any proceeding consolidated
 subsequent to service of the notice of proposed adverse action shall be promptly served with notice of such consolidation.
 [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 3802, Jan. 25, 1999; 74 FR 4636, Jan. 26, 2009]

 § 180.420 Answer.
 (a) Within 30 days after service of the charge or notice of proposed adverse action, a respondent may file an answer. The answer shall include:
 (1) A statement that the respondent admits, denies, or does not have and is unable to obtain sufficient information to admit or deny, each


GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 6
 allegation made. A statement of lack of information shall have the effect of a denial. Any allegation that is not denied shall be deemed to be
 admitted.
 (2) A statement of each affirmative defense and a statement of facts supporting each affirmative defense.
 (b) Failure to file an answer within the 30-day period following service of the charge or notice of proposed adverse action shall be deemed an
 admission of all matters of fact recited therein and may result in the entry of a default decision.

 § 180.425 Amendments to pleadings.
 (a) By right. HUD may amend the charge or notice of proposed adverse action once as a matter of right prior to the filing of the answer.
 (b) By leave. Upon such conditions as are necessary to avoid prejudicing the public interest and the rights of the parties, the ALJ may allow
 amendments to pleadings upon a motion of a party.
 (c) Conformance to the evidence. When issues not raised by the pleadings are reasonably within the scope of the original charge or notice of
 proposed adverse action and have been tried by the express or implied consent of the parties, the issues shall be treated in all respects as if they
 had been raised in the pleadings, and amendments may be made as necessary to make the pleading conform to evidence.
 (d) Supplemental pleadings. The ALJ may, upon reasonable notice, permit supplemental pleadings concerning transactions, occurrences or events
 that have happened or been discovered since the date of the pleadings and which are relevant to any of the issues involved.

 § 180.430 Motions.
 (a) Motions. Any application for an order or other request shall be made by a motion which, unless made during an appearance before the ALJ,
 shall be in writing and shall state the specific relief requested and the basis therefor. Motions made during an appearance before the ALJ shall be
 stated orally and made a part of the transcript. All parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to respond to written or oral motions or requests.
 (b) Responses to written motions. Within seven calendar days after a written motion is served, any party to the proceeding may file a response in
 support of, or in opposition to, the motion. Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ, no further responsive documents may be filed. Failure to file a
 response within the response period constitutes a waiver of any objection to the granting of the motion.
 (c) Oral argument. The ALJ may order oral argument on any motion.

 § 180.435 Prehearing statements.
 (a) Before the commencement of the hearing, the ALJ may direct the parties to file prehearing statements.
 (b) The prehearing statement must state the name of the party presenting the statement and, unless otherwise directed by the ALJ, briefly set forth
 the following:
 (1) The issues involved in the proceeding;
 (2) The facts stipulated by the parties and a statement that the parties have made a good faith effort to stipulate to the greatest extent possible;
 (3) The facts in dispute;
 (4) The witnesses (together with a summary of the testimony expected) and exhibits to be presented at the hearing;
 (5) A brief statement of applicable law;
 (6) Conclusions to be drawn;
 (7) Estimated time required for presentation of the party's case; and
 (8) Such other information as may assist in the disposition of the proceeding.

 § 180.440 Prehearing conferences.
 (a) Before the commencement of or during the course of the hearing, the ALJ may direct the parties to participate in a conference to expedite the
 hearing. Failure to attend a conference may constitute a waiver of all objections to the agreements reached at the conference and to any order with
 respect thereto.
 (b) During the conference, the ALJ may dispose of any procedural matters on which he/she is authorized to rule. At the conference, the following
 matters may be considered:
 (1) Pre-trial motions;
 (2) Identification, simplification and clarification of the issues;
 (3) Necessary amendments to the pleadings;
 (4) Stipulations of fact and of the authenticity, accuracy, and admissibility of documents;




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                               Page 7
 (5) Limitations on the number of witnesses;
 (6) Negotiation, compromise, or settlement of issues;
 (7) The exchange of proposed exhibits and witness lists;
 (8) Matters of which official notice will be requested;
 (9) Scheduling actions discussed at the conference; and
 (10) Such other matters as may assist in the disposition of the proceeding.
 (c) Conferences may be conducted by telephone or in person, but generally shall be conducted by telephone, unless the ALJ determines that this
 method is inappropriate. The ALJ shall give reasonable notice of the time, place and manner of the conference.
 (d) Record of conference. Unless otherwise directed by the ALJ, the conference will not be stenographically recorded. The ALJ will reduce the
 actions taken at the conference to a written order or, if the conference takes place less than seven days before the beginning of the hearing, may
 make a statement at the hearing and on the record summarizing the actions taken at the conference.

 § 180.445 Settlement negotiations before a settlement judge.
 (a) Appointment of settlement judge. The ALJ, upon the motion of a party or upon his or her own motion, may request the Chief Administrative
 Law Judge to appoint another ALJ to conduct settlement negotiations. The order shall direct the settlement judge to report to the presiding ALJ
 within specified time periods.
 (b) Duties of settlement judge. (1) The settlement judge shall convene and preside over conferences and settlement negotiations between the
 parties and assess the practicalities of a potential settlement.
 (2) The settlement judge shall report to the presiding ALJ describing the status of the settlement negotiations, evaluating settlement prospects,
 and recommending the termination or continuation of the settlement negotiations.
 (c) Termination of settlement negotiations. Settlement negotiations shall terminate upon the order of the presiding ALJ issued after consultation
 with the settlement judge. The conduct of settlement negotiations shall not unduly delay the commencement of the hearing.
 [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 73 FR 13723, Mar. 13, 2008; 87 FR 8197, Feb. 14, 2022]

 § 180.450 Resolution of charge or notice of proposed adverse action.
 At any time before a final decision is issued, the parties may submit to the ALJ an agreement resolving the charge or notice of proposed adverse
 action. A charge under the Fair Housing Act can only be resolved with the agreement of the aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge was
 issued. If the agreement is in the public interest, the ALJ shall accept it by issuing an initial decision and consent order based on the agreement.

 Subpart E—Discovery
 § 180.500 Discovery.
 (a) In general. This subpart governs discovery in aid of administrative proceedings under this part. Discovery in Fair Housing Act matters shall be
 completed 15 days before the date scheduled for hearing or at such time as the ALJ shall direct. Discovery in non-Fair Housing Act matters shall
 be completed as the ALJ directs.
 (b) Scope. The parties are encouraged to engage in voluntary discovery procedures. Discovery shall be conducted as expeditiously and
 inexpensively as possible, consistent with the needs of all parties to obtain relevant evidence. Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ, the parties
 may obtain discovery regarding any matter, not privileged, that is relevant to the subject matter involved in the proceeding, including the
 existence, description, nature, custody, condition, and location of documents or persons having knowledge of any discoverable matter. It is not
 grounds for objection that information sought will be inadmissible if the information appears reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of
 admissible evidence.
 (c) Methods. Parties may obtain discovery by one or more of the following methods:
 (1) Deposition upon oral examination or written questions.
 (2) Written interrogatories.
 (3) Requests for the production of documents or other evidence for inspection and other purposes.
 (4) Requests for admissions.
 (5) Upon motion of a party, the presiding ALJ may issue an order requiring a physical or mental examination of a party or of a person in the
 custody or under the legal control of a party.
 (d) Frequency and sequence. Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ or restricted by this subpart, the frequency or sequence of these methods is not
 limited.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 8
 (e) Non-intervening aggrieved person. For purposes of obtaining discovery from a non-intervening aggrieved person, the term party as used in
 this subpart includes the aggrieved person.

 § 180.505 Supplementation of responses.
 A party is under a duty, in a timely fashion, to:
 (a) Supplement a response with respect to any question directly addressed to:
 (1) The identity and location of persons having knowledge of discoverable matters; and
 (2) The identity of each person expected to be called as an expert witness, the subject matter on which the expert witness is expected to testify,
 and the substance of the testimony.
 (b) Amend a response if the party later obtains information upon the basis of which:
 (1) The party knows the response was incorrect when made, or
 (2) The party knows the response, though correct when made, is no longer true, and the circumstances are such that a failure to amend the
 response is, in substance, a knowing concealment.
 (c) Supplement other responses, as imposed by order of the ALJ or by agreement of the parties.

 § 180.510 Interrogatories.
 (a) Any party may serve on any other party written interrogatories to be answered by the party served. If the party served is a public or private
 corporation, a partnership, an association, or a governmental agency, the interrogatories may be answered by any authorized officer or agent who
 shall furnish such information as may be available to the party. A party may serve not more than 30 written interrogatories on another party
 without an order of the ALJ.
 (b) Each interrogatory shall be answered separately and fully in writing under oath or affirmation, unless it is objected to, in which event, the
 reasons for the objection shall be stated in lieu of an answer. The answers shall be signed by the person making them, and the objections may be
 signed by the attorney or other representative making them. The answers and objections shall be served within 15 days after service of the
 interrogatories.
 (c) It is a sufficient answer to an interrogatory to specify the records from which the answer may be derived or ascertained if:
 (1) The answer to the interrogatory may be derived or ascertained from the records of the party on whom the interrogatory has been served or
 from an examination, audit or inspection of such records, or from a compilation, abstract or summary based thereon, and
 (2) The burden of deriving or ascertaining the answer is substantially the same for the party serving the interrogatory as the party served. The
 party serving the interrogatory shall be afforded reasonable opportunity to examine, audit or inspect such records and to make copies,
 compilations, abstracts or summaries. The specification shall include sufficient detail to permit the interrogating party to locate and identify the
 individual records from which the answer may be ascertained.
 (d) Objections to the form of written interrogatories are waived unless served in writing upon the party propounding the interrogatories.

 § 180.515 Depositions.
 (a) Notice. Upon written notice to the witness and to all other parties, a party may take the testimony of a witness by deposition and may request
 the production of specified documents or materials by the witness at the deposition. Notice of the taking of a deposition shall be given not less
 than five days before the deposition is scheduled. The notice shall state:
 (1) The purpose and general scope of the deposition;
 (2) The time and place of the deposition;
 (3) The name and address of the person before whom the deposition is to be taken;
 (4) The name and address of the witness; and
 (5) A specification of the documents and materials that the witness is requested to produce.
 (b) Deposition of an organization. If the deposition of a public or private corporation, partnership, association, or governmental agency is sought,
 the organization so named shall designate one or more officers, directors or agents to testify on its behalf, and may set forth, for each person
 designated, the matters on which he/she will testify.
 (c) Procedure at deposition. Depositions may be taken before any disinterested person having power to administer oaths in the location where the
 deposition is to be taken. Each deponent shall be placed under oath or affirmation, and the other parties will have the right to cross-examine. The
 deponent may have counsel present during the deposition. The questions propounded and all answers and objections thereto shall be reduced to
 writing, read by or to and subscribed by the witness, and certified by the person before whom the deposition was taken. Non-intervening
 aggrieved persons may be present at depositions in which they are not the deponent.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 9
 (d) Motion to terminate or limit examination. During the taking of a deposition, a party or the witness may request suspension of the deposition
 on the grounds of bad faith in the conduct of the examination, oppression of the witness or party, or improper questioning or conduct. Upon
 request for suspension, the deposition will be adjourned. The objecting party or witness must immediately move the ALJ for a ruling on the
 objection. The ALJ may then limit the scope or manner of taking the deposition.
 (e) Waiver of deposing officer's disqualification. Objection to taking a deposition because of the disqualification of the officer before whom it is
 taken is waived unless made before the taking of the deposition begins or as soon thereafter as the disqualification becomes known or could have
 been discovered with reasonable diligence.
 (f) Payment of costs of deposition. The party requesting the deposition shall bear all costs of the deposition.

 § 180.520 Use of deposition at hearings.
 (a) In general. At the hearing, any part or all of a deposition, so far as admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence, may be used against any
 party who was present or represented at the taking of the deposition or who had due notice of the taking of the deposition, in accordance with the
 following provisions:
 (1) Any deposition may be used by any party for the purpose of contradicting or impeaching the testimony of the deponent as a witness.
 (2) The deposition of an expert witness may be used by any party for any purpose, unless the ALJ rules that such use is unfair or in violation of
 due process.
 (3) The deposition of a party, or of anyone who at the time of the taking of the deposition was an officer, director, or duly authorized agent of a
 public or private corporation, partnership, or association that is a party, may be used by any other party for any purpose.
 (4) The deposition of a witness, whether or not a party, may be used by any party for any purpose if the ALJ finds:
 (i) That the witness is dead;
 (ii) That the witness is out of the United States or more than 100 miles from the place of hearing, unless it appears that the absence of the witness
 was procured by the party offering the deposition;
 (iii) That the witness is unable to attend to testify because of age, sickness, infirmity, or imprisonment;
 (iv) That the party offering the deposition has been unable to procure the attendance of the witness by subpoena; or
 (v) Whenever exceptional circumstances exist as to make it desirable, in the interest of justice and with due regard to the importance of presenting
 the testimony of witnesses orally in open hearing, to allow the deposition to be used.
 (5) If a part of a deposition is offered in evidence by a party, any other party may require the party to introduce all of the deposition that is
 relevant to the part introduced. Any party may introduce any other part of the deposition.
 (6) Substitution of parties does not affect the right to use depositions previously taken. If a proceeding has been dismissed and another proceeding
 involving the same subject matter is later brought between the same parties or their representatives or successors in interest, all depositions
 lawfully taken in the former proceeding may be used in the latter proceeding.
 (b) Objections to admissibility. Except as provided in this paragraph, objection may be made at the hearing to receiving in evidence any
 deposition or part of a deposition for any reason that would require the exclusion of the evidence if the witness were present and testifying.
 (1) Objections to the competency of a witness or to the competency, relevancy, or materiality of testimony are not waived by failure to make
 them before or during the taking of the deposition, unless the basis of the objection is one which might have been obviated or removed if
 presented at that time.
 (2) Errors and irregularities occurring at the oral examination in the manner of taking the deposition, in the form of the questions or answers, in
 the oath or affirmation, or in the conduct of parties, and errors of any kind which might be obviated, removed or cured if promptly presented, are
 waived unless reasonable objection is made at the taking of the deposition.

 § 180.525 Requests for production of documents or things for inspection or other purposes, including physical
 and mental examinations.
 (a) Any party may serve on any other party a request to:
 (1) Produce and/or permit the party, or a person acting on the party's behalf, to inspect and copy any designated documents, or to inspect and
 copy, test, or sample any tangible things that contain or may lead to relevant information and that are in the possession, custody, or control of the
 party upon whom the request is served.
 (2) Permit entry upon designated land or other property in the possession or control of the party upon whom the request is served for the purpose
 of inspection and measuring, photographing, testing, or other purposes stated in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.
 (b) Each request shall set forth with reasonable particularity the items or categories to be inspected and shall specify a reasonable time, place and
 manner for making the inspection and performing the related acts.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                                 Page 10
 (c) Within 15 days after service of the request, the party upon whom the request is served shall serve a written response on the party submitting
 the request. The response shall state, with regard to each item or category, that inspection and related activities will be permitted as requested,
 unless there are objections, in which case the reasons for the objection shall be stated.
 (d) Upon motion of any party, when the mental or physical condition (including the blood group) of a party or of a person in the custody or under
 the legal control of a party, is in controversy, the presiding ALJ may order the party to submit to a physical or mental examination by a suitably
 licensed or certified examiner or to produce for examination the person in the party's custody or legal control. The order may be made only on
 motion for good cause shown and upon notice to the person to be examined and to all parties and shall specify the time, place, manner,
 conditions, and scope of the examination and the person or persons by whom it is to be made. A report of the examiner shall be made in
 accordance with Rule 35(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.

 § 180.530 Requests for admissions.
 (a) Any party may serve on any other party a written request for the admission of the truth of any matters relevant to the adjudication set forth in
 the request that relate to statements or opinions of fact or of application of law to fact, including the genuineness and authenticity of any
 documents described in or attached to the request.
 (b) Each matter for which an admission is requested is admitted unless, within 15 days after service of the request, or within such time as the ALJ
 allows, the party to whom the request is directed serves on the requesting party a sworn written answer which:
 (1) Specifically denies, in whole or in part, the matter for which an admission is requested;
 (2) Sets forth in detail why the party cannot truthfully admit or deny the matter; or
 (3) States an objection that the matter is privileged, irrelevant or otherwise improper in whole or in part.
 (c) An answering party may not give lack of information or knowledge as a reason for failure to admit or deny, unless he/she/it states that
 he/she/it has made a reasonable inquiry and that the information known to, or readily obtainable by, him/her/it is insufficient to enable the party
 to admit or deny.
 (d) The party requesting admissions may move for a determination of the sufficiency of the answers or objections. Unless the ALJ determines
 that an objection is justified, the ALJ shall order that an answer be served. If the ALJ determines that an answer does not comply with the
 requirements of this section, the ALJ may order either that the matter is admitted or that an amended answer be served.
 (e) Any matter admitted under this section is conclusively established unless, upon the motion of a party, the ALJ permits the withdrawal or
 amendment of the admission. Any admission made under this section is made for the purposes of the pending proceeding only, is not an
 admission by the party for any other purpose, and may not be used against the party in any other proceeding.

 § 180.535 Protective orders.
 (a) Upon motion of a party or a person from whom discovery is sought or in accordance with § 180.540(c), and for good cause shown, the ALJ
 may make appropriate orders to protect a party or person from annoyance, embarrassment, oppression, or undue burden or expense as a result of
 the requested discovery request. The order may direct that:
 (1) The discovery may not be had;
 (2) The discovery may be had only on specified terms and conditions, including at a designated time and place;
 (3) The discovery may be had by a method of discovery other than that selected by the party seeking discovery;
 (4) Certain matters may not be the subject of discovery, or the scope of discovery may be limited to certain matters;
 (5) Discovery may be conducted with no one present other than persons designated by the ALJ;
 (6) A trade secret or other confidential research, development or commercial information may not be disclosed, or may be disclosed only in a
 designated way; or
 (7) The party or other person from whom discovery is sought may file specified documents or information under seal to be opened as directed by
 the ALJ.
 (b) The ALJ may permit a party or other person from whom discovery is sought, who is seeking a protective order, to make all or part of the
 showing of good cause in camera. If such a showing is made, upon motion of the party or other person from whom discovery is sought, an in
 camera record of the proceedings may be made. If the ALJ enters a protective order, any in camera record of such showing shall be sealed and
 preserved and made available to the ALJ or, in the event of appeal, to the Secretary or a court.

 § 180.540 Motion to compel discovery.
 (a) If a deponent fails to answer a question propounded, or a party upon whom a discovery request has been made fails to respond adequately,
 objects to a request, or fails to produce documents or other inspection as requested, the discovering party may move the ALJ for an order
 compelling discovery in accordance with the request. The motion shall:




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                           Page 11
 (1) State the nature of the request;
 (2) Set forth the response or objection of the deponent or party upon whom the request was served;
 (3) Present arguments supporting the motion; and
 (4) Attach copies of all relevant discovery requests and responses.
 (b) For the purposes of this section, an evasive or incomplete answer or response will be treated as a failure to answer or respond.
 (c) In ruling on a motion under this section, the ALJ may enter an order compelling a response in accordance with the request, may issue
 sanctions under paragraph (d) of this section, or may enter a protective order under § 180.535.
 (d) Sanctions. If a party fails to provide or permit discovery, the ALJ may take such action as is just, including but not limited to the following:
 (1) Inferring that the admission, testimony, document, or other evidence would have been adverse to the party;
 (2) Ordering that, for purposes of the adjudication, the matters regarding which the order was made or any other designated facts shall be taken to
 be established in accordance with the claim of the party obtaining the order;
 (3) Prohibiting the party failing to comply with the order from introducing evidence concerning, or otherwise relying upon, documents or other
 evidence withheld;
 (4) Ordering that the party withholding discovery not introduce into evidence, or otherwise use in the hearing, information obtained in discovery;
 (5) Permitting the requesting party to introduce secondary evidence concerning the information sought;
 (6) Striking any appropriate part of the pleadings or other submissions of the party failing to comply with such order; or
 (7) Taking such other action as may be appropriate.

 § 180.545 Subpoenas.
 (a) This section governs the issuance of subpoenas in administrative proceedings under the Fair Housing Act. Except for time periods stated in
 the rules in this section, to the extent that this section conflicts with procedures for the issuance of subpoenas in civil actions in the United States
 District Court for the District in which the investigation of the discriminatory housing practice took place, the rules of the United States District
 Court apply.
 (b) Issuance of subpoena. Upon the written request of a party, the presiding ALJ or other designated ALJ may issue a subpoena requiring the
 attendance of a witness for the purpose of giving testimony at a deposition or hearing and requiring the production of relevant books, papers,
 documents or tangible things.
 (c) Time of request. Requests for subpoenas in aid of discovery must be submitted in time to permit the conclusion of discovery 15 days before
 the date scheduled for the hearing. If a request for subpoenas of a witness for testimony at a hearing is submitted three days or less before the
 hearing, the subpoena shall be issued at the discretion of the presiding ALJ, or other designated ALJ as appropriate.
 (d) Service. A subpoena may be served by any person who is not a party and is not less than 18 years of age. Service on a person shall be made by
 delivering a copy of the subpoena to the person and by tendering witness fees and mileage to that person. When the subpoena is issued on behalf
 of HUD, witness fees and mileage need not be tendered with the subpoena.
 (e) Amount of witness fees and mileage. A witness summoned by a subpoena issued under this part is entitled to the same witness and mileage
 fees as a witness in proceedings in United States District Courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena shall be paid by the party
 requesting the issuance of the subpoena, or where the ALJ determines that a party is unable to pay the fees, the fees shall be paid by HUD.
 (f) Motion to quash or limit subpoena. Upon a motion by the person served with a subpoena or by a party, made within five days after service of
 the subpoena (but in any event not less than the time specified in the subpoena for compliance), the ALJ may:
 (1) Quash or modify the subpoena if it is unreasonable and oppressive or for other good cause shown; or
 (2) Condition denial of the motion upon the advancement, by the party on whose behalf the subpoena was issued, of the reasonable cost of
 producing subpoenaed books, papers or documents. Where circumstances require, the ALJ may act upon such a motion at any time after a copy
 of the motion has been served upon the party on whose behalf the subpoena was issued.
 (g) Failure to comply with subpoena. If a person fails to comply with a subpoena issued under this section, the party requesting the subpoena may
 refer the matter to the Attorney General for enforcement in appropriate proceedings under 42 U.S.C. 3614(c).
 [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 73 FR 13723, Mar. 13, 2008]




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                               Page 12
 Subpart F—Procedures at Hearing
 § 180.600 Date and place of hearing.
 (a) For Fair Housing Act Cases —(1) Time. The hearing shall commence not later than 120 days after the issuance of the charge, unless it is
 impracticable to do so. If the hearing cannot be commenced within this time period, the ALJ shall notify in writing all parties, aggrieved persons,
 amici, and the Assistant Secretary of the reasons for the delay.
 (2) Place. The hearing will be conducted at a place in the vicinity in which the discriminatory housing practice is alleged to have occurred or to be
 about to occur.
 (b) For Non-Fair Housing Matters. Hearings shall be held in Washington, DC, unless the ALJ determines that the convenience of the respondent
 or HUD requires that another place be selected.
 (c) The ALJ may change the time, date or place of the hearing, or may temporarily adjourn or continue a hearing for good cause shown.

 § 180.605 Conduct of hearings.
 The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. 551-559).

 § 180.610 Waiver of right to appear.
 If all parties waive their right to appear before the ALJ, the ALJ need not conduct an oral hearing. Such waivers shall be in writing and filed with
 the ALJ. The ALJ shall make a record of the pleadings and relevant written evidence submitted by the parties. These documents may constitute
 the evidence in the proceeding, and the decision may be based upon this evidence.

 § 180.615 Failure of party to appear.
 A default decision may be entered against a party failing to appear at a hearing unless such party shows good cause for such failure.

 § 180.620 Evidence.
 The Federal Rules of Evidence apply to the presentation of evidence in hearings under this part.

 § 180.625 Record of hearing.
 (a) All oral hearings shall be recorded and transcribed by a reporter designated and supervised by the ALJ. The original transcript shall be a part
 of the record and shall constitute the sole official transcript. All exhibits introduced as evidence shall be incorporated into the record. The parties
 and the public may obtain transcripts from the official reporter at rates not to exceed the applicable rates fixed by the contract with the reporter.
 (b) Corrections to the official transcript will be permitted upon motion of a party. Motions for correction must be submitted within five days after
 receipt of the transcript. Corrections of the official transcript will be permitted only where errors of substance are involved and upon the ALJ's
 approval.

 § 180.630 Stipulations.
 The parties may stipulate to any pertinent facts by oral agreement at the hearing or by written agreement at any time. Stipulations may be
 submitted into evidence at any time before the end of the hearing. Once received into evidence, a stipulation is binding on the parties.

 § 180.635 Written testimony.
 The ALJ may accept and enter into the record direct testimony of witnesses made by verified written statement rather than by oral presentation at
 the hearing. Unless the ALJ fixes other time periods, affidavits shall be filed and served on the parties not later than 14 days prior to the hearing.
 Witnesses whose testimony is presented by affidavit shall be available for cross-examination as may be required.

 § 180.640 In camera and protective orders.
 The ALJ may limit discovery or the introduction of evidence, or may issue such protective or other orders necessary to protect privileged
 communications. If the ALJ determines that information in documents containing privileged matters should be made available to a party, the ALJ
 may order the preparation of a summary or extract of the nonprivileged matter contained in the original.

 § 180.645 Exhibits.
 (a) Identification. All exhibits offered into evidence shall be numbered sequentially and marked with a designation identifying the sponsor. The
 original of each exhibit offered in evidence or marked for identification shall be filed and retained in the docket of the proceeding, unless the ALJ
 permits the substitution of a copy for the original.
 (b) Exchange of exhibits. One copy of each exhibit offered into evidence must be furnished to each of the parties and to the ALJ. If the ALJ does
 not fix a time for the exchange of exhibits, the parties shall exchange copies of proposed exhibits at the earliest practicable time before the
 commencement of the hearing. Exhibits submitted as rebuttal evidence are not required to be exchanged before the commencement of the hearing



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 13
 if the submission of such evidence could not reasonably be anticipated at that time.
 (c) Authenticity. The authenticity of all documents submitted or exchanged as proposed exhibits prior to the hearing shall be admitted unless
 written objection is filed before the commencement of the hearing, or unless good cause is shown for failing to file such a written objection.
 (d) The parties are encouraged to stipulate as to the admissibility of exhibits.

 § 180.650 Public document items.
 Whenever a public document, such as an official report, decision, opinion, or published scientific or economic statistical data issued by any of the
 executive departments (or their subdivisions), legislative agencies or committees, or administrative agencies of the Federal Government
 (including Government-owned corporations), or a similar document issued by a State or its agencies is offered (in whole or in part), and such
 document (or part thereof) has been shown by the offeror to be reasonably available to the public, such document need not be produced or
 marked for identification, but may be offered for official notice, as a public document item by specifying the document or relevant part thereof.

 § 180.655 Witnesses.
 (a) Witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation.
 (b) If a witness fails or refuses to testify, the failure or refusal to answer any question found by the ALJ to be proper may be grounds for striking
 all or part of the testimony that may have been given by the witness, or for any other action deemed appropriate by the ALJ.

 § 180.660 Closing of record.
 (a) Oral hearings. Where there is an oral hearing, the hearing ends on the day of the adjournment of the oral hearing or, where written briefs are
 permitted, on the date that the written briefs are due.
 (b) Hearing on written record. Where the parties have waived an oral hearing, the hearing ends on the date set by the ALJ as the final date for the
 receipt of submissions by the parties.
 (c) Receipt of evidence following hearing. Following the end of the hearing, no additional evidence may be accepted into the record, except with
 the permission of the ALJ. The ALJ may receive additional evidence upon a determination that new and material evidence was not readily
 available before the end of the hearing, the evidence has been timely submitted, and its acceptance will not unduly prejudice the rights of the
 parties.

 § 180.665 Arguments and briefs.
 (a) Following the submission of evidence at an oral hearing, the parties may file a brief, proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law, or both,
 or, in the ALJ's discretion, make oral arguments.
 (b) Unless otherwise ordered by the ALJ, briefs and proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be filed simultaneously by all parties.
 In Fair Housing Act cases, such filings shall be due not later than 45 days after the adjournment of the oral hearing. In other cases, they shall be
 due as the ALJ orders.

 § 180.670 Initial decision of ALJ.
 (a) The ALJ shall issue an initial decision including findings of fact and conclusions of law upon each material issue of fact or law presented on
 the record. The initial decision of the ALJ shall be based on the whole record of the proceeding. A copy of the initial decision shall be served
 upon all parties, aggrieved persons, the Assistant Secretary, the Secretary, and amici, if any.
 (b) Initial decision in Fair Housing Act cases. (1) The ALJ shall issue an initial decision within 60 days after the end of the hearing, unless it is
 impracticable to do so. If the ALJ is unable to issue the initial decision within this time period (or within any succeeding 60-day period following
 the initial 60-day period), the ALJ shall notify in writing all parties, the aggrieved person on whose behalf the charge was filed, and the Assistant
 Secretary, of the reasons for the delay.
 (2) The initial decision shall state that it will become the final agency decision 30 days after the date of issuance of the initial decision.
 (3) Findings against respondents. If the ALJ finds that a respondent has engaged, or is about to engage, in a discriminatory housing practice, the
 ALJ shall issue an initial decision against the respondent and order such relief as may be appropriate. Relief may include, but is not limited to:
 (i) Ordering the respondent to pay damages to the aggrieved person (including damages caused by humiliation and embarrassment).
 (ii) Ordering injunctive or such other equitable relief as may be appropriate. No such order may affect any contract, sale, encumbrance or lease
 consummated before the issuance of the initial decision that involved a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer or tenant without actual knowledge of
 the charge.
 (iii) Assessing a civil penalty against any respondent to vindicate the public interest in accordance with § 180.671.
 (4) Findings in favor of respondents. If the ALJ finds that the charging party has not established that a respondent has engaged in a discriminatory
 housing practice, the ALJ shall make an initial decision dismissing the charge as against that respondent.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 14
 (c) Initial Decision in Non-Fair Housing Act matters. The ALJ shall issue the initial decision as soon as possible after the end of the hearing.
 (1) Findings against Respondents. If the ALJ finds that a respondent has failed to comply substantially with the statutory and regulatory
 requirements that gave rise to the notice of proposed adverse action, the ALJ shall issue an initial decision against the respondent.
 (i) The initial decision shall provide for suspension or termination of, or refusal to grant or continue, Federal financial assistance, in whole or in
 part, to the involved program or activity.
 (ii) The initial decision may contain such terms, conditions, and other provisions as are consistent with and will effectuate the purposes of the
 applicable statute and regulations, including provisions designed to assure that no Federal financial assistance will be extended for the program or
 activity unless and until the respondent corrects its noncompliance and satisfies the Secretary that it will fully comply with the relevant statute
 and regulations.
 (iii) The initial decision shall state that it will become final only upon the Secretary's approval.
 (2) Findings in favor of respondents. If the ALJ finds that a respondent has not failed to comply substantially with the statutory and regulatory
 requirements that gave rise to the notice of proposed adverse action, the ALJ shall make an initial decision dismissing the notice of proposed
 adverse action. The initial decision shall state that it will become the final agency decision 30 days after the date of issuance.
 [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996, as amended at 64 FR 6754, Feb. 10, 1999; 68 FR 12788, Mar. 17, 2003; 72 FR 5588, Feb. 6, 2007]

 § 180.671 Assessing civil penalties for Fair Housing Act cases.
 (a) Amounts. The ALJ may assess a civil penalty against any respondent under § 180.670(b)(3) for each separate and distinct discriminatory
 housing practice (as defined in paragraph (b) of this section) that the respondent committed, each civil penalty in an amount not to exceed:
 (1) $26,262, if the respondent has not been adjudged in any administrative hearing or civil action permitted under the Fair Housing Act or any
 State or local fair housing law, or in any licensing or regulatory proceeding conducted by a Federal, State, or local governmental agency, to have
 committed any prior discriminatory housing practice.
 (2) $65,653, if the respondent has been adjudged in any administrative hearing or civil action permitted under the Fair Housing Act, or under any
 State or local fair housing law, or in any licensing or regulatory proceeding conducted by a Federal, State, or local government agency, to have
 committed one other discriminatory housing practice and the adjudication was made during the 5-year period preceding the date of filing of the
 charge.
 (3) $131,308, if the respondent has been adjudged in any administrative hearings or civil actions permitted under the Fair Housing Act, or under
 any State or local fair housing law, or in any licensing or regulatory proceeding conducted by a Federal, State, or local government agency, to
 have committed two or more discriminatory housing practices and the adjudications were made during the 7-year period preceding the date of
 filing of the charge.
 (b) Definition of separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice. A separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice is a single,
 continuous uninterrupted transaction or occurrence that violates section 804, 805, 806 or 818 of the Fair Housing Act. Even if such a transaction
 or occurrence violates more than one provision of the Fair Housing Act, violates a provision more than once, or violates the fair housing rights of
 more than one person, it constitutes only one separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice.
 (c) Factors for consideration by ALJ. (1) In determining the amount of the civil penalty to be assessed against any respondent for each separate
 and distinct discriminatory housing practice the respondent committed, the ALJ shall consider the following six (6) factors:
 (i) Whether that respondent has previously been adjudged to have committed unlawful housing discrimination;
 (ii) That respondent's financial resources;
 (iii) The nature and circumstances of the violation;
 (iv) The degree of that respondent's culpability;
 (v) The goal of deterrence; and
 (vi) Other matters as justice may require.
 (2)(i) Where the ALJ finds any respondent to have committed a housing-related hate act, the ALJ shall take this fact into account in favor of
 imposing a maximum civil penalty under the factors listed in paragraphs (c)(1)(iii), (iv), (v), and (vi) of this section.
 (ii) For purposes of this section, the term housing-related hate act means any act that constitutes a discriminatory housing practice under section
 818 of the Fair Housing Act and which constitutes or is accompanied or characterized by actual violence, assault, bodily harm, and/or harm to
 property; intimidation or coercion that has such elements; or the threat or commission of any action intended to assist or be a part of any such act.
 (iii) Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to require an ALJ to assess any amount less than a maximum civil penalty in a non-hate act case,
 where the ALJ finds that the factors listed in paragraphs (c)(1)(i) through (vi) of this section warrant the assessment of a maximum civil penalty.
 (d) Persons previously adjudged to have committed a discriminatory housing practice. If the acts constituting the discriminatory housing practice
 that is the subject of the charge were committed by the same natural person who has previously been adjudged, in any administrative proceeding


GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 15
 or civil action, to have committed acts constituting a discriminatory housing practice, the time periods in paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) of this section
 do not apply.
 (e) Multiple discriminatory housing practices committed by the same respondent; multiple respondents. (1) In a proceeding where a respondent
 has been determined to have engaged in, or is about to engage in, more than one separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice, a separate
 civil penalty may be assessed against the respondent for each separate and distinct discriminatory housing practice.
 (2) In a proceeding involving two or more respondents who have been determined to have engaged in, or are about to engage in, one or more
 discriminatory housing practices, one or more civil penalties, as provided under this section, may be assessed against each respondent.
 [64 FR 6754, Feb. 10, 1999, as amended at 68 FR 12788, Mar. 17, 2003; 72 FR 5588, Feb. 6, 2007; 78 FR 4060, Jan. 18, 2013; 82 FR 24525,
 May 30, 2017; 83 FR 32793, July 16, 2018; 84 FR 9454, Mar. 15, 2019; 85 FR 13044, Mar. 6, 2020; 86 FR 14373, Mar. 16, 2021; 87 FR 24421,
 Apr. 26, 2022; 88 FR 9748, Feb. 15, 2023; 89 FR 13617, Feb. 23, 2024; 90 FR 24748, June 12, 2025]

 § 180.675 Petitions for review.
 (a) The Secretary may affirm, modify or set aside, in whole or in part, the initial decision, or remand the initial decision for further proceedings.
 (b) Any party adversely affected by the ALJ's initial decision may file a motion with the Secretary explaining how and why the initial decision
 should be modified, set aside, in whole or in part, or remanded for further proceedings. Such petition shall be based only on the following
 grounds:
 (1) A finding of material fact is not supported by substantial evidence;
 (2) A necessary legal conclusion is erroneous;
 (3) The decision is contrary to law, duly promulgated rules of HUD, or legal precedent; or
 (4) A prejudicial error of procedure was committed.
 (c) Each issue shall be plainly and concisely stated and shall be supported by citations to the record when assignments of error are based on the
 record, statutes, regulations, cases, or other authorities relied upon. Except for good cause shown, no assignment of error by any party shall rely
 on any question of fact or law not presented to the ALJ.
 (d) Such petitions must be received by the Secretary within 15 days after issuance of the initial decision.
 (e) A statement in opposition to the petition for review may be filed. Such opposition must be received by the Secretary within 22 days after
 issuance of the initial decision.
 (f) A petition not granted within 30 days after the issuance of the initial decision is deemed denied.
 (g) If the Secretary remands the decision for further proceedings, the ALJ shall issue an initial decision on remand within 60 days after the date of
 issuance of the Secretary's decision, unless it is impracticable to do so. If the ALJ is unable to issue the initial decision within this time period (or
 within any succeeding 60-day period following the initial 60-day period), the ALJ shall notify in writing the parties, the aggrieved person on
 whose behalf the charge was filed, any amicus curiae and the Assistant Secretary, of the reasons for the delay.

 § 180.680 Final decisions.
 (a) Public disclosure. HUD shall make public disclosure of each final decision.
 (b) Where initial decision does not provide for suspension or termination of, or refusal to grant or continue, Federal financial assistance—(1)
 Issuance of final decision by Secretary. The Secretary may review any finding of fact, conclusion of law, or order contained in the initial decision
 of the ALJ and issue a final decision in the proceeding. The Secretary shall serve the final decision on all parties no later than 30 days after the
 date of issuance of the initial decision.
 (2) No final decision by Secretary. If the Secretary does not serve a final decision within the time period described in paragraph (b)(1) of this
 section, the initial decision of the ALJ will become the final agency decision. For the purposes of this part, such a final decision will be
 considered to have been issued 30 days after the date of issuance of the initial decision.
 (c) Where initial decision provides for suspension or termination of, or refusal to grant or continue, Federal financial assistance. When the initial
 decision provides for the suspension or termination of, or the refusal to grant or continue, Federal financial assistance, or the imposition of any
 other sanction, such decision shall not constitute an order or final agency action until approved by the Secretary. Further, in the case of
 proceedings under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, no order suspending, terminating, or refusing to grant or continue Federal financial
 assistance shall become effective until the requirements of 24 CFR 1.8(c) have been met.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                               Page 16
 Subpart G—Post-Final Decision in Fair Housing Cases
 § 180.700 Action upon issuance of a final decision in Fair Housing Act cases.
 (a) Licensed or regulated businesses. (1) If a final decision includes a finding that a respondent has engaged or is about to engage in a
 discriminatory housing practice in the course of a business that is subject to licensing or regulation by a Federal, State or local governmental
 agency, the Assistant Secretary will notify the governmental agency of the decision by:
 (i) Sending copies of the findings of fact, conclusions of law and final decision to the governmental agency by certified mail; and
 (ii) Recommending appropriate disciplinary action to the governmental agency, including, where appropriate, the suspension or revocation of the
 respondent's license.
 (2) The Assistant Secretary will notify the appropriate governmental agencies within 30 days after the date of issuance of the final decision,
 unless a petition for judicial review of the final decision as described in § 180.710 of this part has been filed before the issuance of the notification
 of the agency. If such a petition has been filed, the Assistant Secretary will provide the notification to the governmental agency within 30 days
 after the date that the final decision is affirmed upon review. If a petition for judicial review is timely filed following the notification of the
 governmental agency, the Assistant Secretary will promptly notify the governmental agency of the petition and withdraw his or her
 recommendation.
 (b) Notification to the Attorney General. If a final decision includes a finding that a respondent has engaged or is about to engage in a
 discriminatory housing practice and another final decision including such a finding was issued under this part within the five years preceding the
 date of issuance of the final decision, the General Counsel will notify the Attorney General of the decisions by sending a copy of each final
 decision.

 § 180.705 Attorney's fees and costs.
 Following the issuance of the final decision, any prevailing party, except HUD, may apply for attorney's fees and costs. The ALJ will issue an
 initial decision awarding or denying such fees and costs. The initial decision will become HUD's final decision unless the Secretary reviews the
 initial decision and issues a final decision on fees and costs within 30 days. The recovery of reasonable attorney's fees and costs will be permitted
 as follows:
 (a) If the respondent is the prevailing party, HUD will be liable for reasonable attorney's fees and costs to the extent provided under the Equal
 Access to Justice Act (5 U.S.C. 504) and HUD's regulations at 24 CFR part 14, and an intervenor will be liable for reasonable attorney's fees and
 costs only to the extent that the intervenor's participation in the administrative proceeding was frivolous or vexatious, or was for the purpose of
 harassment.
 (b) To the extent that an intervenor is a prevailing party, the respondent will be liable for reasonable attorney's fees unless special circumstances
 make the recovery of such fees and costs unjust.

 § 180.710 Judicial review of final decision.
 (a) Any party adversely affected by a final decision may file a petition in the appropriate United States Court of Appeals for review of the
 decision under 42 U.S.C. 3612(i). The petition must be filed within 30 days after the date of issuance of the final decision.
 (b) If no petition for review is filed under paragraph (a) of this section within 45 days after the date of issuance of the final decision, the findings
 of facts and final decision shall be conclusive in connection with any petition for enforcement.

 § 180.715 Enforcement of final decision.
 (a) Enforcement by HUD. Following the issuance of a final decision, the General Counsel may petition the appropriate United States Court of
 Appeals for the enforcement of the final decision and for appropriate temporary relief or restraining order in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 3612(j).
 (b) Enforcement by others. If no petition for review has been filed within 60 days after the date of issuance, and the General Counsel has not
 sought enforcement of the final decision as described in paragraph (a) of this section, any person entitled to relief under the final decision may
 petition the appropriate United States Court of Appeals for the enforcement of the final decision in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 3612(m).

 Subpart H—Post-Final Decision in Non-Fair Housing Act Matters
 § 180.800 Post-termination proceedings.
 (a) A respondent adversely affected by the order terminating, discontinuing, or refusing Federal financial assistance in consequence of
 proceedings pursuant to this title may request the Secretary for an order authorizing payment, or permitting resumption, of Federal financial
 assistance. Such request shall:
 (1) Be in writing;
 (2) Affirmatively show that, since entry of the order, the respondent has brought its program or activity into compliance with statutory and
 regulatory requirements; and



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                               Page 17
 (3) Set forth specifically, and in detail, the steps taken to achieve such compliance.
 (b) If the Secretary denies such request, the respondent may request an expeditious hearing. The request for such a hearing shall be addressed to
 the Secretary within 30 days after the respondent is informed that the Secretary has refused to authorize payment or permit resumption of Federal
 financial assistance and shall specify why the Secretary erred in denying the request.
 (c) The procedures established by this part shall be applicable to any hearing.

 § 180.805 Judicial review of final decision.
 A termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance is subject to judicial review as provided in the applicable statute.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 18
