GH Real Estate approved legal-source text chunk — GH-FED-01_Federal-Fair-Housing-HUD-Regulations_CURRENT.part-002.txt — verified through 2026-07-12. Official source text controls.

 the general public.
 [62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]

 Subpart D—Prohibition Against Discrimination Because of Handicap
 § 100.200 Purpose.
 The purpose of this subpart is to effectuate sections 6 (a) and (b) and 15 of the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.

 § 100.201 Definitions.
 As used in this subpart:
 Accessible when used with respect to the public and common use areas of a building containing covered multifamily dwellings, means that the
 public or common use areas of the building can be approached, entered, and used by individuals with physical disabilities. The phrase “ readily
 accessible to and usable by ” is synonymous with accessible. A public or common use area that complies with the appropriate requirements of
 ICC A117.1-2009, ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003, ICC/ANSI A117.1-1998, CABO/ANSI A117.1-1992, ANSI A117.1-1986 (all incorporated by
 reference, see § 100.201a) or a comparable standard is deemed “ accessible ” within the meaning of this paragraph.
 Accessible route means a continuous unobstructed path connecting accessible elements and spaces in a building or within a site that can be
 negotiated by a person with a severe disability using a wheelchair and that is also safe for and usable by people with other disabilities. Interior
 accessible routes may include corridors, floors, ramps, elevators, and lifts. Exterior accessible routes may include parking access aisles, curb
 ramps, walks, ramps, and lifts. A route that complies with the appropriate requirements of ICC A117.1-2009, ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003,
 ICC/ANSI A117.1-1998, CABO/ANSI A117.1-1992, ANSI A117.1-1986 (all incorporated by reference, see § 100.201a) or a comparable
 standard is an “ accessible route ” within the meaning of this paragraph.
 Building means a structure, facility or portion thereof that contains or serves one or more dwelling units.
 Building entrance on an accessible route means an accessible entrance to a building that is connected by an accessible route to public
 transportation stops, to accessible parking and passenger loading zones, or to public streets or sidewalks, if available. A building entrance that
 complies with ICC A117.1-2009, ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003, ICC/ANSI A117.1-1998, CABO/ANSI A117.1-1992, ANSI A117.1-1986 (all
 incorporated by reference, see § 100.201a) or a comparable standard is a “ building entrance on an accessible route ” within the meaning of this
 paragraph.
 Common use areas means rooms, spaces or elements inside or outside of a building that are made available for the use of residents of a building
 or the guests thereof. These areas include hallways, lounges, lobbies, laundry rooms, refuse rooms, mail rooms, recreational areas and
 passageways among and between buildings.
 Controlled substance means any drug or other substance, or immediate precursor included in the definition in section 102 of the Controlled
 Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802).
 Covered multifamily dwellings means buildings consisting of 4 or more dwelling units if such buildings have one or more elevators; and ground
 floor dwelling units in other buildings consisting of 4 or more dwelling units.
 Dwelling unit means a single unit of residence for a family or one or more persons. Examples of dwelling units include: a single family home; an
 apartment unit within an apartment building; and in other types of dwellings in which sleeping accommodations are provided but toileting or
 cooking facilities are shared by occupants of more than one room or portion of the dwelling, rooms in which people sleep. Examples of the latter
 include dormitory rooms and sleeping accommodations in shelters intended for occupancy as a residence for homeless persons.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                            Page 11
 Entrance means any access point to a building or portion of a building used by residents for the purpose of entering.
 Exterior means all areas of the premises outside of an individual dwelling unit.
 First occupancy means a building that has never before been used for any purpose.
 Ground floor means a floor of a building with a building entrance on an accessible route. A building may have more than one ground floor.
 Handicap means, with respect to a person, a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities; a record
 of such an impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment. This term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a
 controlled substance. For purposes of this part, an individual shall not be considered to have a handicap solely because that individual is a
 transvestite. As used in this definition:
 (a) Physical or mental impairment includes:
 (1) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems:
 Neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive;
 genito-urinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
 (2) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning
 disabilities. The term physical or mental impairment includes, but is not limited to, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and
 hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, Human
 Immunodeficiency Virus infection, mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other than addiction caused by current, illegal use of a
 controlled substance) and alcoholism.
 (b) Major life activities means functions such as caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing,
 learning and working.
 (c) Has a record of such an impairment means has a history of, or has been misclassified as having, a mental or physical impairment that
 substantially limits one or more major life activities.
 (d) Is regarded as having an impairment means:
 (1) Has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially limit one or more major life activities but that is treated by another person as
 constituting such a limitation;
 (2) Has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of other toward
 such impairment; or
 (3) Has none of the impairments defined in paragraph (a) of this definition but is treated by another person as having such an impairment.
 Interior means the spaces, parts, components or elements of an individual dwelling unit.
 Modification means any change to the public or common use areas of a building or any change to a dwelling unit.
 Premises means the interior or exterior spaces, parts, components or elements of a building, including individual dwelling units and the public
 and common use areas of a building.
 Public use areas means interior or exterior rooms or spaces of a building that are made available to the general public. Public use may be provided
 at a building that is privately or publicly owned.
 Site means a parcel of land bounded by a property line or a designated portion of a public right or way.
 [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 69 FR 18803, Apr. 9, 2004; 73 FR 63615, Oct. 24, 2008; 85 FR 78962, Dec. 8, 2020]

 § 100.201a Incorporation by reference.
 (a) Certain material is incorporated by reference into this part with the approval of the Director of the Federal Register under 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and
 1 CFR part 51. All approved material is available for inspection at Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street SW,
 Room 5240, Washington, DC 20410-0001, telephone number 202-708-2333, and is available from the sources listed below. It is also available
 for inspection at the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA). For information on the availability of this material at NARA, email
 fedreg.legal@nara.gov or go to www.archives.gov/federal-register/cfr/ibr-locations.html. The phone numbers included in this section may also
 be reached by persons who are deaf or hard of hearing, or have speech disabilities, by dialing 711 via teletype (TTY).
 (b) American National Standards Institute (ANSI), 25 West 43rd Street, 4th Floor, New York, NY 10036, 212.642.4900, info@ansi.org.
 https://webstore.ansi.org.
 (1) ANSI A117.1-1986, American National Standard for Buildings and Facilities: Providing Accessibility and Usability for Physically
 Handicapped People, 1986 edition, into §§ 100.201 and 100.205.
 (2) [Reserved]
 (c) International Code Council (ICC), 500 New Jersey Avenue NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001-2070, telephone number 1-888-422-7233,


GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                            Page 12
 http://www.iccsafe.org/e/category.html.
 (1) CABO/ANSI A117.1-1992, American National Standard: Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, 1992 edition, into §§ 100.201 and
 100.205.
 (2) ICC/ANSI A117.1-1998, American National Standard: Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, 1998 edition, into §§ 100.201 and
 100.205.
 (3) ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003, American National Standard: Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, 2003 edition, into §§ 100.201 and
 100.205.
 (4) ICC A117.1-2009, Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities, 2009 edition, approved October 20, 2010, into §§ 100.201 and 100.205.
 [85 FR 78962, Dec. 8, 2020]

 § 100.202 General prohibitions against discrimination because of handicap.
 (a) It shall be unlawful to discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of
 a handicap of—
 (1) That buyer or renter;
 (2) A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
 (3) Any person associated with that person.
 (b) It shall be unlawful to discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the
 provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of—
 (1) That buyer or renter;
 (2) A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented, or made available; or
 (3) Any person associated with that person.
 (c) It shall be unlawful to make an inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling, a person intending to reside in that dwelling after it is
 so sold, rented or made available, or any person associated with that person, has a handicap or to make inquiry as to the nature or severity of a
 handicap of such a person. However, this paragraph does not prohibit the following inquiries, provided these inquiries are made of all applicants,
 whether or not they have handicaps:
 (1) Inquiry into an applicant's ability to meet the requirements of ownership or tenancy;
 (2) Inquiry to determine whether an applicant is qualified for a dwelling available only to persons with handicaps or to persons with a particular
 type of handicap;
 (3) Inquiry to determine whether an applicant for a dwelling is qualified for a priority available to persons with handicaps or to persons with a
 particular type of handicap;
 (4) Inquiring whether an applicant for a dwelling is a current illegal abuser or addict of a controlled substance;
 (5) Inquiring whether an applicant has been convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance.
 (d) Nothing in this subpart requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health
 or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.

 § 100.203 Reasonable modifications of existing premises.
 (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to permit, at the expense of a handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises,
 occupied or to be occupied by a handicapped person, if the proposed modifications may be necessary to afford the handicapped person full
 enjoyment of the premises of a dwelling. In the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a
 modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear
 and tear excepted. The landlord may not increase for handicapped persons any customarily required security deposit. However, where it is
 necessary in order to ensure with reasonable certainty that funds will be available to pay for the restorations at the end of the tenancy, the landlord
 may negotiate as part of such a restoration agreement a provision requiring that the tenant pay into an interest bearing escrow account, over a
 reasonable period, a reasonable amount of money not to exceed the cost of the restorations. The interest in any such account shall accrue to the
 benefit of the tenant.
 (b) A landlord may condition permission for a modification on the renter providing a reasonable description of the proposed modifications as well
 as reasonable assurances that the work will be done in a workmanlike manner and that any required building permits will be obtained.
 (c) The application of paragraph (a) of this section may be illustrated by the following examples:




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                                  Page 13
 Example (1):
 A tenant with a handicap asks his or her landlord for permission to install grab bars in the bathroom at his or her own expense. It is necessary to
 reinforce the walls with blocking between studs in order to affix the grab bars. It is unlawful for the landlord to refuse to permit the tenant, at the
 tenant's own expense, from making the modifications necessary to add the grab bars. However, the landlord may condition permission for the
 modification on the tenant agreeing to restore the bathroom to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear
 excepted. It would be reasonable for the landlord to require the tenant to remove the grab bars at the end of the tenancy. The landlord may also
 reasonably require that the wall to which the grab bars are to be attached be repaired and restored to its original condition, reasonable wear and
 tear excepted. However, it would be unreasonable for the landlord to require the tenant to remove the blocking, since the reinforced walls will not
 interfere in any way with the landlord's or the next tenant's use and enjoyment of the premises and may be needed by some future tenant.

 Example (2):
 An applicant for rental housing has a child who uses a wheelchair. The bathroom door in the dwelling unit is too narrow to permit the wheelchair
 to pass. The applicant asks the landlord for permission to widen the doorway at the applicant's own expense. It is unlawful for the landlord to
 refuse to permit the applicant to make the modification. Further, the landlord may not, in usual circumstances, condition permission for the
 modification on the applicant paying for the doorway to be narrowed at the end of the lease because a wider doorway will not interfere with the
 landlord's or the next tenant's use and enjoyment of the premises.

 § 100.204 Reasonable accommodations.
 (a) It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such
 accommodations may be necessary to afford a handicapped person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling unit, including public and
 common use areas.
 (b) The application of this section may be illustrated by the following examples:

 Example (1):
 A blind applicant for rental housing wants live in a dwelling unit with a seeing eye dog. The building has a no pets policy. It is a violation of §
 100.204 for the owner or manager of the apartment complex to refuse to permit the applicant to live in the apartment with a seeing eye dog
 because, without the seeing eye dog, the blind person will not have an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.

 Example (2):
 Progress Gardens is a 300 unit apartment complex with 450 parking spaces which are available to tenants and guests of Progress Gardens on a
 first come first served basis. John applies for housing in Progress Gardens. John is mobility impaired and is unable to walk more than a short
 distance and therefore requests that a parking space near his unit be reserved for him so he will not have to walk very far to get to his apartment. It
 is a violation of § 100.204 for the owner or manager of Progress Gardens to refuse to make this accommodation. Without a reserved space, John
 might be unable to live in Progress Gardens at all or, when he has to park in a space far from his unit, might have great difficulty getting from his
 car to his apartment unit. The accommodation therefore is necessary to afford John an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The
 accommodation is reasonable because it is feasible and practical under the circumstances.

 § 100.205 Design and construction requirements.
 (a) Covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991 shall be designed and constructed to have at least one building
 entrance on an accessible route unless it is impractical to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. For purposes of this
 section, a covered multifamily dwelling shall be deemed to be designed and constructed for first occupancy on or before March 13, 1991, if the
 dwelling is occupied by that date, or if the last building permit or renewal thereof for the dwelling is issued by a State, County or local
 government on or before June 15, 1990. The burden of establishing impracticality because of terrain or unusual site characteristics is on the
 person or persons who designed or constructed the housing facility.
 (b) The application of paragraph (a) of this section may be illustrated by the following examples:

 Example (1):
 A real estate developer plans to construct six covered multifamily dwelling units on a site with a hilly terrain. Because of the terrain, it will be
 necessary to climb a long and steep stairway in order to enter the dwellings. Since there is no practical way to provide an accessible route to any
 of the dwellings, one need not be provided.

 Example (2):
 A real estate developer plans to construct a building consisting of 10 units of multifamily housing on a waterfront site that floods frequently.
 Because of this unusual characteristic of the site, the builder plans to construct the building on stilts. It is customary for housing in the geographic
 area where the site is located to be built on stilts. The housing may lawfully be constructed on the proposed site on stilts even though this means
 that there will be no practical way to provide an accessible route to the building entrance.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 14
 Example (3):
 A real estate developer plans to construct a multifamily housing facility on a particular site. The developer would like the facility to be built on
 the site to contain as many units as possible. Because of the configuration and terrain of the site, it is possible to construct a building with 105
 units on the site provided the site does not have an accessible route leading to the building entrance. It is also possible to construct a building on
 the site with an accessible route leading to the building entrance. However, such a building would have no more than 100 dwelling units. The
 building to be constructed on the site must have a building entrance on an accessible route because it is not impractical to provide such an
 entrance because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site.
 (c) All covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991 with a building entrance on an accessible route shall be designed
 and constructed in such a manner that—
 (1) The public and common use areas are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons;
 (2) All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in
 wheelchairs; and
 (3) All premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain the following features of adaptable design:
 (i) An accessible route into and through the covered dwelling unit;
 (ii) Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations;
 (iii) Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars around the toilet, tub, shower, stall and shower seat, where such
 facilities are provided; and
 (iv) Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
 (d) The application of paragraph (c) of this section may be illustrated by the following examples:

 Example (1):
 A developer plans to construct a 100 unit condominium apartment building with one elevator. In accordance with paragraph (a), the building has
 at least one accessible route leading to an accessible entrance. All 100 units are covered multifamily dwelling units and they all must be designed
 and constructed so that they comply with the accessibility requirements of paragraph (c) of this section.

 Example (2):
 A developer plans to construct 30 garden apartments in a three story building. The building will not have an elevator. The building will have one
 accessible entrance which will be on the first floor. Since the building does not have an elevator, only the ground floor units are covered
 multifamily units. The ground floor is the first floor because that is the floor that has an accessible entrance. All of the dwelling units on the first
 floor must meet the accessibility requirements of paragraph (c) of this section and must have access to at least one of each type of public or
 common use area available for residents in the building.
 (e)(1) Compliance with the appropriate requirements of ICC A117.1-2009, ICC/ANSI A117.1-2003, ICC/ANSI A117.1-1998, CABO/ANSI
 A117.1-1992, or ANSI A117.1-1986 (all incorporated by reference, see § 100.201a), or suffices to satisfy the requirements of paragraph (c)(3) of
 this section.
 (2) The following also qualify as HUD-recognized safe harbors for compliance with the Fair Housing Act design and construction requirements:
 (i) Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines, March 6, 1991, in conjunction with the Supplement to Notice of Fair Housing Accessibility
 Guidelines: Questions and Answers About the Guidelines, June 28, 1994;
 (ii) Fair Housing Act Design Manual, published by HUD in 1996, updated in 1998;
 (iii) 2000 ICC Code Requirements for Housing Accessibility (CRHA), published by the International Code Council (ICC), October 2000 (with
 corrections contained in ICC-issued errata sheet), if adopted without modification and without waiver of any of the provisions;
 (iv) 2000 International Building Code (IBC), as amended by the 2001 Supplement to the International Building Code (2001 IBC Supplement), if
 adopted without modification and without waiver of any of the provisions intended to address the Fair Housing Act's design and construction
 requirements;
 (v) 2003 International Building Code (IBC), if adopted without modification and without waiver of any of the provisions intended to address the
 Fair Housing Act's design and construction requirements, and conditioned upon the ICC publishing and distributing a statement to jurisdictions
 and past and future purchasers of the 2003 IBC stating, “ICC interprets Section 1104.1, and specifically, the Exception to Section 1104.1, to be
 read together with Section 1107.4, and that the Code requires an accessible pedestrian route from site arrival points to accessible building
 entrances, unless site impracticality applies. Exception 1 to Section 1107.4 is not applicable to site arrival points for any Type B dwelling units
 because site impracticality is addressed under Section 1107.7.”
 (vi) 2006 International Building Code; published by ICC, January 2006, with the January 31, 2007, erratum to correct the text missing from
 Section 1107.7.5, if adopted without modification and without waiver of any of the provisions intended to address the Fair Housing Act's design



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                               Page 15
 and construction requirements, and interpreted in accordance with the relevant 2006 IBC Commentary;
 (vii) 2009 International Building Code, published by ICC ( http://www.iccsafe.org ), and interpreted in accordance with the relevant 2009 IBC
 Commentary;
 (viii) 2012 International Building Code, published by ICC ( http://www.iccsafe.org ), and interpreted in accordance with the relevant 2012 IBC
 Commentary;
 (ix) 2015 International Building Code, published by ICC ( http://www.iccsafe.org ), and interpreted in accordance with the relevant 2015 IBC
 Commentary; and
 (x) 2018 International Building Code, published by ICC ( http://www.iccsafe.org ), and interpreted in accordance with the relevant 2018 IBC
 Commentary.
 (3) HUD may propose safe harbors by Federal Register notification that provides for a minimum of 30 days public comment period. HUD will
 publish a final notification announcing safe harbors after considering public comments. Compliance with safe harbors established by Federal
 Register notification will satisfy the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section.
 (f) Compliance with a duly enacted law of a State or unit of general local government that includes the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (c) of
 this section satisfies the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section.
 (g)(1) It is the policy of HUD to encourage States and units of general local government to include, in their existing procedures for the review and
 approval of newly constructed covered multifamily dwellings, determinations as to whether the design and construction of such dwellings are
 consistent with paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section.
 (2) A State or unit of general local government may review and approve newly constructed multifamily dwellings for the purpose of making
 determinations as to whether the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (c) of this section are met.
 (h) Determinations of compliance or noncompliance by a State or a unit of general local government under paragraph (f) or (g) of this section are
 not conclusive in enforcement proceedings under the Fair Housing Amendments Act.
 (i) This subpart does not invalidate or limit any law of a State or political subdivision of a State that requires dwellings to be designed and
 constructed in a manner that affords handicapped persons greater access than is required by this subpart.
 [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 56 FR 11665, Mar. 20, 1991; 73 FR 63616, Oct. 24, 2008; 85 FR 78963, Dec. 8, 2020]

 Subpart E—Housing for Older Persons
 § 100.300 Purpose.
 The purpose of this subpart is to effectuate the exemption in the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 that relates to housing for older persons.

 § 100.301 Exemption.
 (a) The provisions regarding familial status in this part do not apply to housing which satisfies the requirements of § 100.302, § 100.303 or §
 100.304.
 (b) Nothing in this part limits the applicability of any reasonable local, State, or Federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants
 permitted to occupy a dwelling.

 § 100.302 State and Federal elderly housing programs.
 The provisions regarding familial status in this part shall not apply to housing provided under any Federal or State program that the Secretary
 determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the State or Federal program.

 § 100.303 62 or over housing.
 (a) The provisions regarding familial status in this part shall not apply to housing intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or
 older. Housing satisfies the requirements of this section even though:
 (1) There are persons residing in such housing on September 13, 1988 who are under 62 years of age, provided that all new occupants are persons
 62 years of age or older;
 (2) There are unoccupied units, provided that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons 62 years of age or over;
 (3) There are units occupied by employees of the housing (and family members residing in the same unit) who are under 62 years of age provided
 they perform substantial duties directly related to the management or maintenance of the housing.
 (b) The following examples illustrate the application of paragraph (a) of this section:




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                               Page 16
 Example (1):
 John and Mary apply for housing at the Vista Heights apartment complex which is an elderly housing complex operated for persons 62 years of
 age or older. John is 62 years of age. Mary is 59 years of age. If Vista Heights wishes to retain its “62 or over” exemption it must refuse to rent to
 John and Mary because Mary is under 62 years of age. However, if Vista Heights does rent to John and Mary, it might qualify for the “55 or
 over” exemption in § 100.304.

 Example (2):
 The Blueberry Hill retirement community has 100 dwelling units. On September 13, 1988, 15 units were vacant and 35 units were occupied with
 at least one person who is under 62 years of age. The remaining 50 units were occupied by persons who were all 62 years of age or older.
 Blueberry Hill can qualify for the “62 or over” exemption as long as all units that were occupied after September 13, 1988 are occupied by
 persons who were 62 years of age or older. The people under 62 in the 35 units previously described need not be required to leave for Blueberry
 Hill to qualify for the “62 or over” exemption.

 § 100.304 Housing for persons who are 55 years of age or older.
 (a) The provisions regarding familial status in this part shall not apply to housing intended and operated for persons 55 years of age or older.
 Housing qualifies for this exemption if:
 (1) The alleged violation occurred before December 28, 1995 and the housing community or facility complied with the HUD regulations in effect
 at the time of the alleged violation; or
 (2) The alleged violation occurred on or after December 28, 1995 and the housing community or facility complies with:
 (i) Section 807(b)(2)(C) (42 U.S.C. 3607(b)) of the Fair Housing Act as amended; and
 (ii) 24 CFR 100.305, 100.306, and 100.307.
 (b) For purposes of this subpart, housing facility or community means any dwelling or group of dwelling units governed by a common set of
 rules, regulations or restrictions. A portion or portions of a single building shall not constitute a housing facility or community. Examples of a
 housing facility or community include, but are not limited to:
 (1) A condominium association;
 (2) A cooperative;
 (3) A property governed by a homeowners' or resident association;
 (4) A municipally zoned area;
 (5) A leased property under common private ownership;
 (6) A mobile home park; and
 (7) A manufactured housing community.
 (c) For purposes of this subpart, older person means a person 55 years of age or older.
 [64 FR 16329, Apr. 2, 1999]

 § 100.305 80 percent occupancy.
 (a) In order for a housing facility or community to qualify as housing for older persons under § 100.304, at least 80 percent of its occupied units
 must be occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older.
 (b) For purposes of this subpart, occupied unit means:
 (1) A dwelling unit that is actually occupied by one or more persons on the date that the exemption is claimed; or
 (2) A temporarily vacant unit, if the primary occupant has resided in the unit during the past year and intends to return on a periodic basis.
 (c) For purposes of this subpart, occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older means that on the date the exemption for housing
 designed for persons who are 55 years of age or older is claimed:
 (1) At least one occupant of the dwelling unit is 55 years of age or older; or
 (2) If the dwelling unit is temporarily vacant, at least one of the occupants immediately prior to the date on which the unit was temporarily
 vacated was 55 years of age or older.
 (d) Newly constructed housing for first occupancy after March 12, 1989 need not comply with the requirements of this section until at least 25
 percent of the units are occupied. For purposes of this section, newly constructed housing includes a facility or community that has been wholly
 unoccupied for at least 90 days prior to re-occupancy due to renovation or rehabilitation.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 17
 (e) Housing satisfies the requirements of this section even though:
 (1) On September 13, 1988, under 80 percent of the occupied units in the housing facility or community were occupied by at least one person 55
 years of age or older, provided that at least 80 percent of the units occupied by new occupants after September 13, 1988 are occupied by at least
 one person 55 years of age or older.
 (2) There are unoccupied units, provided that at least 80 percent of the occupied units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older.
 (3) There are units occupied by employees of the housing facility or community (and family members residing in the same unit) who are under 55
 years of age, provided the employees perform substantial duties related to the management or maintenance of the facility or community.
 (4) There are units occupied by persons who are necessary to provide a reasonable accommodation to disabled residents as required by § 100.204
 and who are under the age of 55.
 (5) For a period expiring one year from the effective date of this final regulation, there are insufficient units occupied by at least one person 55
 years of age or older, but the housing facility or community, at the time the exemption is asserted:
 (i) Has reserved all unoccupied units for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older until at least 80 percent of the units are
 occupied by at least one person who is 55 years of age or older; and
 (ii) Meets the requirements of §§ 100.304, 100.306, and 100.307.
 (f) For purposes of the transition provision described in § 100.305(e)(5), a housing facility or community may not evict, refuse to renew leases, or
 otherwise penalize families with children who reside in the facility or community in order to achieve occupancy of at least 80 percent of the
 occupied units by at least one person 55 years of age or older.
 (g) Where application of the 80 percent rule results in a fraction of a unit, that unit shall be considered to be included in the units that must be
 occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older.
 (h) Each housing facility or community may determine the age restriction, if any, for units that are not occupied by at least one person 55 years of
 age or older, so long as the housing facility or community complies with the provisions of § 100.306.
 [64 FR 16329, Apr. 2, 1999]

 § 100.306 Intent to operate as housing designed for persons who are 55 years of age or older.
 (a) In order for a housing facility or community to qualify as housing designed for persons who are 55 years of age or older, it must publish and
 adhere to policies and procedures that demonstrate its intent to operate as housing for persons 55 years of age or older. The following factors,
 among others, are considered relevant in determining whether the housing facility or community has complied with this requirement:
 (1) The manner in which the housing facility or community is described to prospective residents;
 (2) Any advertising designed to attract prospective residents;
 (3) Lease provisions;
 (4) Written rules, regulations, covenants, deed or other restrictions;
 (5) The maintenance and consistent application of relevant procedures;
 (6) Actual practices of the housing facility or community; and
 (7) Public posting in common areas of statements describing the facility or community as housing for persons 55 years of age or older.
 (b) Phrases such as “adult living”, “adult community”, or similar statements in any written advertisement or prospectus are not consistent with the
 intent that the housing facility or community intends to operate as housing for persons 55 years of age or older.
 (c) If there is language in deed or other community or facility documents which is inconsistent with the intent to provide housing for persons who
 are 55 years of age or older housing, HUD shall consider documented evidence of a good faith attempt to remove such language in determining
 whether the housing facility or community complies with the requirements of this section in conjunction with other evidence of intent.
 (d) A housing facility or community may allow occupancy by families with children as long as it meets the requirements of §§ 100.305 and
 100.306(a).

 (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0046)
 [64 FR 16330, Apr. 2, 1999]

 § 100.307 Verification of occupancy.
 (a) In order for a housing facility or community to qualify as housing for persons 55 years of age or older, it must be able to produce, in response
 to a complaint filed under this title, verification of compliance with § 100.305 through reliable surveys and affidavits.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 18
 (b) A facility or community shall, within 180 days of the effective date of this rule, develop procedures for routinely determining the occupancy
 of each unit, including the identification of whether at least one occupant of each unit is 55 years of age or older. Such procedures may be part of
 a normal leasing or purchasing arrangement.
 (c) The procedures described in paragraph (b) of this section must provide for regular updates, through surveys or other means, of the initial
 information supplied by the occupants of the housing facility or community. Such updates must take place at least once every two years. A survey
 may include information regarding whether any units are occupied by persons described in paragraphs (e)(1), (e)(3), and (e)(4) of § 100.305.
 (d) Any of the following documents are considered reliable documentation of the age of the occupants of the housing facility or community:
 (1) Driver's license;
 (2) Birth certificate;
 (3) Passport;
 (4) Immigration card;
 (5) Military identification;
 (6) Any other state, local, national, or international official documents containing a birth date of comparable reliability; or
 (7) A certification in a lease, application, affidavit, or other document signed by any member of the household age 18 or older asserting that at
 least one person in the unit is 55 years of age or older.
 (e) A facility or community shall consider any one of the forms of verification identified above as adequate for verification of age, provided that
 it contains specific information about current age or date of birth.
 (f) The housing facility or community must establish and maintain appropriate policies to require that occupants comply with the age verification
 procedures required by this section.
 (g) If the occupants of a particular dwelling unit refuse to comply with the age verification procedures, the housing facility or community may, if
 it has sufficient evidence, consider the unit to be occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older. Such evidence may include:
 (1) Government records or documents, such as a local household census;
 (2) Prior forms or applications; or
 (3) A statement from an individual who has personal knowledge of the age of the occupants. The individual's statement must set forth the basis
 for such knowledge and be signed under the penalty of perjury.
 (h) Surveys and verification procedures which comply with the requirements of this section shall be admissible in administrative and judicial
 proceedings for the purpose of verifying occupancy.
 (i) A summary of occupancy surveys shall be available for inspection upon reasonable notice and request by any person.

 (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0046)
 [64 FR 16330, Apr. 2, 1999]

 § 100.308 Good faith defense against civil money damages.
 (a) A person shall not be held personally liable for monetary damages for discriminating on the basis of familial status, if the person acted with
 the good faith belief that the housing facility or community qualified for a housing for older persons exemption under this subpart.
 (b)(1) A person claiming the good faith belief defense must have actual knowledge that the housing facility or community has, through an
 authorized representative, asserted in writing that it qualifies for a housing for older persons exemption.
 (2) Before the date on which the discrimination is claimed to have occurred, a community or facility, through its authorized representatives, must
 certify, in writing and under oath or affirmation, to the person subsequently claiming the defense that it complies with the requirements for such
 an exemption as housing for persons 55 years of age or older in order for such person to claim the defense.
 (3) For purposes of this section, an authorized representative of a housing facility or community means the individual, committee, management
 company, owner, or other entity having the responsibility for adherence to the requirements established by this subpart.
 (4) For purposes of this section, a person means a natural person.
 (5) A person shall not be entitled to the good faith defense if the person has actual knowledge that the housing facility or community does not, or
 will not, qualify as housing for persons 55 years of age or older. Such a person will be ineligible for the good faith defense regardless of whether
 the person received the written assurance described in paragraph (b) of this section.
 [64 FR 16330, Apr. 2, 1999]




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                           Page 19
 Subpart F—Interference, Coercion or Intimidation
 § 100.400 Prohibited interference, coercion or intimidation.
 (a) This subpart provides the Department's interpretation of the conduct that is unlawful under section 818 of the Fair Housing Act.
 (b) It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of that person
 having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of that person having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right
 granted or protected by this part.
 (c) Conduct made unlawful under this section includes, but is not limited to, the following:
 (1) Coercing a person, either orally, in writing, or by other means, to deny or limit the benefits provided that person in connection with the sale or
 rental of a dwelling or in connection with a residential real estate-related transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial
 status, or national origin.
 (2) Threatening, intimidating or interfering with persons in their enjoyment of a dwelling because of the race, color, religion, sex, handicap,
 familial status, or national origin of such persons, or of visitors or associates of such persons.
 (3) Threatening an employee or agent with dismissal or an adverse employment action, or taking such adverse employment action, for any effort
 to assist a person seeking access to the sale or rental of a dwelling or seeking access to any residential real estate-related transaction, because of
 the race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin of that person or of any person associated with that person.
 (4) Intimidating or threatening any person because that person is engaging in activities designed to make other persons aware of, or encouraging
 such other persons to exercise, rights granted or protected by this part.
 (5) Retaliating against any person because that person has made a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in a proceeding
 under the Fair Housing Act.
 (6) Retaliating against any person because that person reported a discriminatory housing practice to a housing provider or other authority.
 [54 FR 3283, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 81 FR 63075, Sept. 14, 2016]

 Subpart G—Discriminatory Effect
 § 100.500 Discriminatory effect prohibited.
 Liability may be established under the Fair Housing Act based on a practice's discriminatory effect, as defined in paragraph (a) of this section,
 even if the practice was not motivated by a discriminatory intent. The practice may still be lawful if supported by a legally sufficient justification,
 as defined in paragraph (b) of this section. The burdens of proof for establishing a violation under this subpart are set forth in paragraph (c) of this
 section.
 (a) Discriminatory effect. A practice has a discriminatory effect where it actually or predictably results in a disparate impact on a group of
 persons or creates, increases, reinforces, or perpetuates segregated housing patterns because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status,
 or national origin.
 (b) Legally sufficient justification. (1) A legally sufficient justification exists where the challenged practice:
 (i) Is necessary to achieve one or more substantial, legitimate, nondiscriminatory interests of the respondent, with respect to claims brought under
 42 U.S.C. 3612, or defendant, with respect to claims brought under 42 U.S.C. 3613 or 3614; and
 (ii) Those interests could not be served by another practice that has a less discriminatory effect.
 (2) A legally sufficient justification must be supported by evidence and may not be hypothetical or speculative. The burdens of proof for
 establishing each of the two elements of a legally sufficient justification are set forth in paragraphs (c)(2) and (3) of this section.
 (c) Burdens of proof in discriminatory effects cases. (1) The charging party, with respect to a claim brought under 42 U.S.C. 3612, or the
 plaintiff, with respect to a claim brought under 42 U.S.C. 3613 or 3614, has the burden of proving that a challenged practice caused or predictably
 will cause a discriminatory effect.
 (2) Once the charging party or plaintiff satisfies the burden of proof set forth in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the respondent or defendant has
 the burden of proving that the challenged practice is necessary to achieve one or more substantial, legitimate, nondiscriminatory interests of the
 respondent or defendant.
 (3) If the respondent or defendant satisfies the burden of proof set forth in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the charging party or plaintiff may still
 prevail upon proving that the substantial, legitimate, nondiscriminatory interests supporting the challenged practice could be served by another
 practice that has a less discriminatory effect.
 (d) Relationship to discriminatory intent. A demonstration that a practice is supported by a legally sufficient justification, as defined in paragraph
 (b) of this section, may not be used as a defense against a claim of intentional discrimination.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                               Page 20
 [88 FR 19500, Mar. 31, 2023]

 Subpart H— Quid Pro Quo and Hostile Environment Harassment
 Source: 81 FR 63075, Sept. 14, 2016, unless otherwise noted.

 § 100.600 Quid pro quo and hostile environment harassment.
 (a) General. Quid pro quo and hostile environment harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin or handicap
 may violate sections 804, 805, 806 or 818 of the Act, depending on the conduct. The same conduct may violate one or more of these provisions.
 (1) Quid pro quo harassment. Quid pro quo harassment refers to an unwelcome request or demand to engage in conduct where submission to the
 request or demand, either explicitly or implicitly, is made a condition related to: The sale, rental or availability of a dwelling; the terms,
 conditions, or privileges of the sale or rental, or the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith; or the availability, terms, or
 conditions of a residential real estate-related transaction. An unwelcome request or demand may constitute quid pro quo harassment even if a
 person acquiesces in the unwelcome request or demand.
 (2) Hostile environment harassment. Hostile environment harassment refers to unwelcome conduct that is sufficiently severe or pervasive as to
 interfere with: The availability, sale, rental, or use or enjoyment of a dwelling; the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale or rental, or the
 provision or enjoyment of services or facilities in connection therewith; or the availability, terms, or conditions of a residential real estate-related
 transaction. Hostile environment harassment does not require a change in the economic benefits, terms, or conditions of the dwelling or
 housing-related services or facilities, or of the residential real-estate transaction.
 (i) Totality of the circumstances. Whether hostile environment harassment exists depends upon the totality of the circumstances.
 (A) Factors to be considered to determine whether hostile environment harassment exists include, but are not limited to, the nature of the conduct,
 the context in which the incident(s) occurred, the severity, scope, frequency, duration, and location of the conduct, and the relationships of the
 persons involved.
 (B) Neither psychological nor physical harm must be demonstrated to prove that a hostile environment exists. Evidence of psychological or
 physical harm may, however, be relevant in determining whether a hostile environment existed and, if so, the amount of damages to which an
 aggrieved person may be entitled.
 (C) Whether unwelcome conduct is sufficiently severe or pervasive as to create a hostile environment is evaluated from the perspective of a
 reasonable person in the aggrieved person's position.
 (ii) Title VII affirmative defense. The affirmative defense to an employer's vicarious liability for hostile environment harassment by a supervisor
 under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 does not apply to cases brought pursuant to the Fair Housing Act.
 (b) Type of conduct. Harassment can be written, verbal, or other conduct, and does not require physical contact.
 (c) Number of incidents. A single incident of harassment because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, national origin, or handicap may
 constitute a discriminatory housing practice, where the incident is sufficiently severe to create a hostile environment, or evidences a quid pro quo.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                               Page 21
                     Fair Housing — Complaint Processing
 Citation: 24 C.F.R. part 103

 Authority: Tier 1 — binding federal regulation

 Applicability / trigger: Triggered by a HUD Fair Housing Act complaint or investigation; useful for preservation, response,
 conciliation, and timing.

 Source: https://www.ecfr.gov/api/versioner/v1/full/2026-07-09/title-24.xml?part=103

 Currentness: Official eCFR versioned XML as of 2026-07-09; retrieved 2026-07-12.

 Retrieved: 2026-07-12



 This is a searchable rendering of an official source. It is not legal advice. The official source controls, and current law must be
 rechecked before action.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                             Page 1
 PART 103—FAIR HOUSING—COMPLAINT PROCESSING
 Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3600-3619.
 Source: 54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, unless otherwise noted.

 Subpart A—Purpose and Definitions
 § 103.1 Purpose and applicability.
 (a) This part contains the procedures established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development for the investigation and conciliation of
 complaints under section 810 of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. 3610.
 (b) This part applies to:
 (1) Complaints alleging discriminatory housing practices because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin; and
 (2) Complaints alleging discriminatory housing practices on account of handicap or familial status occurring on or after March 12, 1989.
 (c) Part 180 of this chapter governs the administrative proceedings before an administrative law judge adjudicating charges issued under §
 103.405.
 (d) The Department will reasonably accommodate persons with disabilities who are participants in complaint processing.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]

 § 103.5 Other civil rights authorities.
 In addition to the Fair Housing Act, other civil rights authorities may be applicable in a particular case. Thus, where a person charged with a
 discriminatory housing practice in a complaint filed under section 810 of the Fair Housing Act is also prohibited from engaging in similar
 practices under title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-5), section 109 of the Housing and Community Development
 Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5309), Executive Order 11063 of November 20, 1962, on Equal Opportunity in Housing (27 FR 11527-11530, November
 24, 1962), section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), the Age Discrimination Act (42 U.S.C. 6101) or other applicable law,
 the person may also be subject to action by HUD or other Federal agencies under the rules, regulations, and procedures prescribed under title VI
 (24 CFR parts 1 and 2), section 109 (24 CFR 570.602)), Executive Order 11063 (24 CFR part 107), section 504 (24 CFR part 8), or other
 applicable law.

 § 103.9 Definitions.
 The terms Fair Housing Act, General Counsel, and HUD are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
 Aggrieved person includes any person who:
 (a) Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or
 (b) Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.
 Assistant Secretary means the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity in HUD.
 Attorney General means the Attorney General of the United States.
 Complainant means the person (including the Assistant Secretary) who files a complaint under this part.
 Conciliation means the attempted resolution of issues raised by a complaint, or by the investigation of a complaint, through informal negotiations
 involving the aggrieved person, the respondent, and the Assistant Secretary.
 Conciliation agreement means a written agreement setting forth the resolution of the issues in conciliation.
 Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under section 804, 805, 806 or 818 of the Fair Housing Act, as described in part
 100.
 Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or
 more families, or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or
 portion thereof.
 Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
 joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustee in cases under title 11 U.S.C., receivers and fiduciaries.
 Personal service means handing a copy of the document to the person to be served or leaving a copy of the document with a person of suitable
 age and discretion at the place of business, residence or usual place of abode of the person to be served.
 Receipt of notice means the day that personal service is completed by handing or delivering a copy of the document to an appropriate person or



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                          Page 2
 the date that a document is delivered by certified mail.
 Respondent means:
 (a) The person or other entity accused in a complaint of a discriminatory housing practice; and
 (b) Any other person or entity identified in the course of investigation and notified as required under § 103.50.
 State means any of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any of the territories and possessions of the
 United States.
 Substantially equivalent State or local agency means a State or local agency certified by HUD under 24 CFR part 115 (including agencies
 certified for interim referrals).
 To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 5205, Feb. 9, 1996]

 Subpart B—Complaints
 § 103.10 What can I do if I believe someone is discriminating against me in the sale, rental, finance, or
 advertisement of housing?
 You can notify HUD if you believe there has been discrimination against you in any activity related to housing because of race, color, religion,
 national origin, sex, disability, or the presence of children under the age of 18 in a household.
 [64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]

 § 103.15 Can I file a claim if the discrimination has not yet occurred?
 Yes, you may file a claim with HUD if you have knowledge that a discriminatory action is about to occur.
 [64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]

 § 103.20 Can someone help me with filing a claim?
 HUD's Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity can help you in filing a claim, if you contact them directly. You, or anyone who acts for
 you, may also ask any HUD office or an organization, individual, or attorney to help you.
 [64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]

 § 103.25 What information should I provide to HUD?
 You should provide us with:
 (a) Your name, address, and telephone numbers where you can be reached;
 (b) The name and address of the persons, businesses, or organizations you believe discriminated against you;
 (c) If there is a specific property involved, you should provide the property's address and physical description, such as apartment, condominium,
 house, or vacant lot; and
 (d) A brief description of how you were discriminated against in an activity related to housing. You should include in this description the date
 when the discrimination happened and why you believe the discrimination occurred because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
 disability, or the presence of children under the age of 18 in a household.
 [64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]

 § 103.30 How should I bring a claim that I am the victim of discrimination?
 (a) You can file a claim by mail or telephone with any of HUD's Offices of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity or with any State or local agency
 that HUD has certified to receive complaints.
 (b) You can call or go to any other HUD office for help in filing a claim. These offices will send your claim to HUD's Office of Fair Housing and
 Equal Opportunity, which will contact you about the filing of your complaint.
 [64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]

 § 103.35 Is there a time limit on when I can file?
 Yes, you must notify us within one year that you are a victim of discrimination. If you indicate that there is more than one act of discrimination,
 or that the discrimination is continuing, we must receive your information within one year of the last incident of discrimination.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                            Page 3
 [64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]

 § 103.40 Can I change my complaint after it is filed?
 (a) Yes, you may change your fair housing complaint:
 (1) At any time to add or remove people according to the law and the facts; or
 (2) To correct other items, such as to add additional information found during the investigation of the complaint.
 (b) You must approve any change to your complaint; we will consider the changes made as of the date of your original complaint.
 [64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]

 Subpart C—Referral of Complaints to State and Local Agencies
 § 103.100 Notification and referral to substantially equivalent State or local agencies.
 (a) Whenever a complaint alleges a discriminatory housing practice that is within the jurisdiction of a substantially equivalent State or local
 agency and the agency is certified or may accept interim referrals under 24 CFR part 115 with regard to the alleged discriminatory housing
 practice, the Assistant Secretary will notify the agency of the filing of the complaint and refer the complaint to the agency for further processing
 before HUD takes any action with respect to the complaint. The Assistant Secretary will notify the State or local agency of the referral by
 certified mail.
 (b) The Assistant Secretary will notify the aggrieved person and the respondent, by certified mail or personal service, of the notification and
 referral under paragraph (a) of this section. The notice will advise the aggrieved person and the respondent of the aggrieved person's right to
 commence a civil action under section 813 of the Fair Housing Act in an appropriate United States District Court, not later than two years after
 the occurrence or termination of the alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice will state that the computation of this two-year period
 excludes any time during which a proceeding is pending under this part or part 180 with respect to complaint or charge based on the alleged
 discriminatory housing practice. The notice will also state that the time period includes the time during which an action arising from a breach of a
 conciliation agreement under section 814(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act is pending.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]

 § 103.105 Cessation of action on referred complaints.
 A referral under § 103.100 does not prohibit the Assistant Secretary from taking appropriate action to review or investigate matters in the
 complaint that raise issues cognizable under other civil rights authorities applicable to departmental programs (see § 103.5).
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 14379, Apr. 1, 1996]

 § 103.110 Reactivation of referred complaints.
 The Assistant Secretary may reactivate a complaint referred under § 103.100 for processing by HUD if:
 (a) The substantially equivalent State or local agency consents or requests the reactivation;
 (b) The Assistant Secretary determines that, with respect to the alleged discriminatory housing practice, the agency no longer qualifies for
 certification as a substantially equivalent State or local agency and may not accept interim referrals; or
 (c) The substantially equivalent State or local agency has failed to commence proceedings with respect to the complaint within 30 days of the
 date that it received the notification and referral of the complaint; or the agency commenced proceedings within this 30-day period, but the
 Assistant Secretary determines that the agency has failed to carry the proceedings forward with reasonable promptness.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 14379, Apr. 1, 1996]

 § 103.115 Notification upon reactivation.
 (a) Whenever a complaint referred to a State or local fair housing agency under § 103.100 is reactivated under § 103.110, the Assistant Secretary
 will notify the substantially equivalent State or local agency, the aggrieved person and the respondent of HUD's reactivation. The notification will
 be made by certified mail or personal service.
 (b) The notification to the respondent and the aggrieved person will:
 (1) Advise the aggrieved person and the respondent of the time limits applicable to complaint processing and the procedural rights and
 obligations of the aggrieved person and the respondent under this part and part 180.
 (2) State that HUD will process the complaint under the Fair Housing Act and that the State or local agency to which the complaint was referred
 may continue to process the complaint under State or local law.
 (3) Advise the aggrieved person and the respondent of the aggrieved person's right to commence a civil action under section 813 of the Fair



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 4
 Housing Act in an appropriate United States District Court, not later than two years after the occurrence or termination of the alleged
 discriminatory housing practice. The notice will state that the computation of this two-year period excludes any time during which a proceeding
 is pending under this part or part 180 with respect to a complaint or charge based on the alleged discriminatory housing practice under part 180.
 The notices will also state that the time period includes the time during which an action arising from a breach of conciliation agreement under
 section 814(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act is pending.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]

 Subpart D—Investigation Procedures
 § 103.200 Investigations.
 (a) Upon the filing of a complaint under § 103.40, the Assistant Secretary will initiate an investigation. The purposes of an investigation are:
 (1) To obtain information concerning the events or transactions that relate to the alleged discriminatory housing practice identified in the
 complaint.
 (2) To document policies or practices of the respondent involved in the alleged discriminatory housing practice raised in the complaint.
 (3) To develop factual data necessary for the General Counsel to make a determination under § 103.400 whether reasonable cause exists to
 believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, and for the Assistant Secretary to make a determination under §
 103.400 that no reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, and to take other
 actions provided under this part.
 (b) Upon the written direction of the Assistant Secretary, HUD may initate an investigation of housing practices to determine whether a
 complaint should be filed under subpart B of this part. Such investigations will be conducted in accordance with the procedures described under
 this subpart.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 53293, Dec. 28, 1990, 57 FR 39116, Aug. 28, 1992]

 § 103.201 Service of notice on aggrieved person.
 Upon the filing of a complaint, the Assistant Secretary will notify, by certified mail or personal service, each aggrieved person on whose behalf
 the complaint was filed. The notice will:
 (a) Acknowledge the filing of the complaint and state the date that the complaint was accepted for filing.
 (b) Include a copy of the complaint.
 (c) Advise the aggrieved person of the time limits applicable to complaint processing and of the procedural rights and obligations of the
 aggrieved person under this part and part 180.
 (d) Advise the aggrieved person of his or her right to commence a civil action under section 813 of the Fair Housing Act in an appropriate United
 States District Court, not later than two years after the occurrence or termination of the alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice will
 state that the computation of this two-year period excludes any time during which a proceeding is pending under this part or part 180 with respect
 to a complaint or charge based on the alleged discriminatory housing practice. The notice will also state that the time period includes the time
 during which an action arising from a breach of a conciliation agreement under section 814(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act is pending.
 (e) Advise the aggrieved person that retaliation against any person because he or she made a complaint or testified, assisted, or participated in an
 investigation or conciliation under this part or an administrative proceeding under part 180, is a discriminatory housing practice that is prohibited
 under section 818 of the Fair Housing Act.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996. Redesignated at 64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]

 § 103.202 Notification of respondent; joinder of additional or substitute respondents.
 (a) Within ten days of the filing of a complaint under § 103.40 or the filing of an amended complaint under § 103.42, the Assistant Secretary will
 serve a notice on each respondent by certified mail or by personal service. A person who is not named as a respondent in a complaint, but who is
 identified in the course of the investigation under subpart D of this part as a person who is alleged to be engaged, to have engaged, or to be about
 to engage in the discriminatory housing practice upon which the complaint is based may be joined as an additional or substitute respondent by
 service of a notice on the person under this section within ten days of the identification.
 (b) The Assistant Secretary will also serve notice on any person who directs or controls, or who has the right to direct or control, the conduct of
 another person who is involved in a fair housing complaint.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996. Redesignated and amended at 64 FR 18540, 18541, Apr. 14, 1999]




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 5
 § 103.203 Answer to complaint.
 (a) The respondent may file an answer not later than ten days after receipt of the notice described in § 103.50. The respondent may assert any
 defense that might be available to a defendant in a court of law. The answer must be signed and affirmed by the respondent. The affirmation must
 state: “I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct.”
 (b) An answer may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time with the consent of the Assistant Secretary.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989. Redesignated at 64 FR 18540, Apr. 14, 1999]

 § 103.204 HUD complaints and compliance reviews.
 (a) The Assistant Secretary may conduct an investigation and file a complaint under this subpart based on information that one or more
 discriminatory housing practices has occurred, or is about to occur.
 (b) HUD may also initiate compliance reviews under other appropriate civil rights authorities, such as E.O. 11063 on Equal Opportunity in
 Housing, title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, section 109 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, section 504 of the
 Rehabilitation Act of 1973 or the Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
 (c) HUD may also make the information you provide available to other Federal, State, or local agencies having an interest in the matter. In
 making such information available, HUD will take steps to protect the confidentiality of any informant or complainant when desired by the
 informant or complainant.
 [64 FR 18541, Apr. 14, 1999]

 § 103.205 Systemic processing.
 Where the Assistant Secretary determines that the alleged discriminatory practices contained in a complaint are pervasive or institutional in
 nature, or that the processing of the complaint will involve complex issues, novel questions of fact or law, or will affect a large number of
 persons, the Assistant Secretary may identify the complaint for systemic processing. This determination can be based on the face of the complaint
 or on information gathered in connection with an investigation. Systemic investigations may focus not only on documenting facts involved in the
 alleged discriminatory housing practice that is the subject of the complaint but also on review of other policies and procedures related to matters
 under investigation, to make sure that they also comply with the nondiscrimination requirements of the Fair Housing Act.

 § 103.215 Conduct of investigation.
 (a) In conducting investigations under this part, the Assistant Secretary will seek the voluntary cooperation of all persons to obtain access to
 premises, records, documents, individuals, and other possible sources of information; to examine, record, and copy necessary materials; and to
 take and record testimony or statements of persons reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation.
 (b) The Assistant Secretary may conduct and order discovery in aid of the investigation by the same methods and to the same extent that
 discovery may be ordered in an administrative proceeding under 24 CFR part 180, except that the Assistant Secretary shall have the power to
 issue subpoenas described in 24 CFR 180.545 in support of the investigation. Subpoenas issued by the Assistant Secretary must be approved by
 the General Counsel as to their legality before issuance.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 41482, Aug. 8, 1996; 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996; 62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]

 § 103.220 Cooperation of Federal, State and local agencies.
 The Assistant Secretary, in processing Fair Housing Act complaints, may seek the cooperation and utilize the services of Federal, State or local
 agencies, including any agency having regulatory or supervisory authority over financial institutions.

 § 103.225 Completion of investigation.
 The investigation will remain open until a determination is made under § 103.400, or a conciliation agreement is executed and approved under §
 103.310. Unless it is impracticable to do so, the Assistant Secretary will complete the investigation of the alleged discriminatory housing practice
 within 100 days of the filing of the complaint (or where the Assistant Secretary reactivates the complaint, within 100 days after service of the
 notice of reactivation under § 103.115). If the Assistant Secretary is unable to complete the investigation within the 100-day period, HUD will
 notify the aggrieved person and the respondent, by mail, of the reasons for the delay.
 [61 FR 14380, Apr. 1, 1996]

 § 103.230 Final investigative report.
 (a) At the end of each investigation under this part, the Assistant Secretary will prepare a final investigative report. The investigative report will
 contain:
 (1) The names and dates of contacts with witnesses, except that the report will not disclose the names of witnesses that request anonymity. HUD,
 however, may be required to disclose the names of such witnesses in the course of an administrative hearing under part 180 of this chapter or a
 civil action under title VIII of the Fair Housing Act;



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                               Page 6
 (2) A summary and the dates of correspondence and other contacts with the aggrieved person and the respondent;
 (3) A summary description of other pertinent records;
 (4) A summary of witness statements; and
 (5) Answers to interrogatories.
 (b) A final investigative report may be amended at any time, if additional evidence is discovered.
 (c) Notwithstanding the prohibitions and requirements with respect to disclosure of information contained in § 103.330, the Assistant Secretary
 will make information derived from an investigation, including the final investigative report, available to the aggrieved person and the
 respondent. Following the completion of investigation, the Assistant Secretary shall notify the aggrieved person and the respondent that the final
 investigation report is complete and will be provided upon request.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997]

 Subpart E—Conciliation Procedures
 § 103.300 Conciliation.
 (a) During the period beginning with the filing of the complaint and ending with the filing of a charge or the dismissal of the complaint by the
 General Counsel or the Assistant Secretary, the Assistant Secretary will, to the extent feasible, attempt to conciliate the complaint.
 (b) In conciliating a complaint, HUD will attempt to achieve a just resolution of the complaint and to obtain assurances that the respondent will
 satisfactorily remedy any violations of the rights of the aggrieved person, and take such action as will assure the elimination of discriminatory
 housing practices, or the prevention of their occurrence, in the future.
 (c) Generally, officers, employees, and agents of HUD engaged in the investigation of a complaint under this part will not participate or advise in
 the conciliation of the same complaint or in any factually related complaint. Where the rights of the aggrieved party and the respondent can be
 protected and the prohibitions with respect to the disclosure of information can be observed, the investigator may suspend fact finding and engage
 in efforts to resolve the complaint by conciliation.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 55 FR 53294, Dec. 28, 1990]

 § 103.310 Conciliation agreement.
 (a) The terms of a settlement of a complaint will be reduced to a written conciliation agreement. The conciliation agreement shall seek to protect
 the interests of the aggrieved person, other persons similarly situated, and the public interest. The types of relief that may be sought for the
 aggrieved person are described in § 103.315. The provisions that may be sought for the vindication of the public interest are described in §
 103.320.
 (b)(1) The agreement must be executed by the respondent and the complainant. The agreement is subject to the approval of the Assistant
 Secretary, who will indicate approval by signing the agreement. The Assistant Secretary will approve an agreement and, if the Assistant Secretary
 is the complainant, will execute the agreement, only if:
 (i) The complainant and the respondent agree to the relief accorded the aggrieved person;
 (ii) The provisions of the agreement will adequately vindicate the public interest; and
 (iii) If the Assistant Secretary is the complainant, all aggrieved persons named in the complaint are satisfied with the relief provided to protect
 their interests.
 (2) The General Counsel may issue a charge under § 103.405 if the aggrieved person and the respondent have executed a conciliation agreement
 that has not been approved by the Assistant Secretary.

 § 103.315 Relief sought for aggrieved persons.
 (a) The following types of relief may be sought for aggrieved persons in conciliation:
 (1) Monetary relief in the form of damages, including damages caused by humiliation or embarrassment, and attorney fees;
 (2) Other equitable relief including, but not limited to, access to the dwelling at issue, or to a comparable dwelling, the provision of services or
 facilities in connection with a dwelling, or other specific relief; or
 (3) Injunctive relief appropriate to the elimination of discriminatory housing practices affecting the aggrieved person or other persons.
 (b) The conciliation agreement may provide for binding arbitration of the dispute arising from the complaint. Arbitration may award appropriate
 relief as described in paragraph (a) of this section. The aggrieved person and the respondent may, in the conciliation agreement, limit the types of
 relief that may be awarded under binding arbitration.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 7
 § 103.320 Provisions sought for the public interest.
 The following are types of provisions may be sought for the vindication of the public interest:
 (a) Elimination of discriminatory housing practices.
 (b) Prevention of future discriminatory housing practices.
 (c) Remedial affirmative activities to overcome discriminatory housing practices.
 (d) Reporting requirements.
 (e) Monitoring and enforcement activities.

 § 103.325 Termination of conciliation efforts.
 (a) HUD may terminate its efforts to conciliate the complaint if the respondent fails or refuses to confer with HUD; the aggrieved person or the
 respondent fail to make a good faith effort to resolve any dispute; or HUD finds, for any reason, that voluntary agreement is not likely to result.
 (b) Where the aggrieved person has commenced a civil action under an Act of Congress or a State law seeking relief with respect to the alleged
 discriminatory housing practice, and the trial in the action has commenced, HUD will terminate conciliation unless the court specifically requests
 assistance from the Assistant Secretary.

 § 103.330 Prohibitions and requirements with respect to disclosure of information obtained during conciliation.
 (a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section and § 103.230(c), nothing that is said or done in the course of conciliation under this part
 may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent administrative hearing under part 180 or in civil actions under title VIII of the Fair
 Housing Act, without the written consent of the persons concerned.
 (b) Conciliation agreements shall be made public, unless the aggrieved person and respondent request nondisclosure and the Assistant Secretary
 determines that disclosure is not required to further the purposes of the Fair Housing Act. Notwithstanding a determination that disclosure of a
 conciliation agreement is not required, the Assistant Secretary may publish tabulated descriptions of the results of all conciliation efforts.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]

 § 103.335 Review of compliance with conciliation agreements.
 HUD may, from time to time, review compliance with the terms of any conciliation agreement. Whenever HUD has reasonable cause to believe
 that a respondent has breached a conciliation agreement, the Assistant Secretary shall refer the matter to the Attorney General with a
 recommendation for the filing of a civil action under section 814(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act for the enforcement of the terms of the
 conciliation agreement.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 59 FR 39956, Aug. 5, 1994]

 Subpart F—Issuance of Charge
 § 103.400 Reasonable cause determination.
 (a) If a conciliation agreement under § 103.310 has not been executed by the complainant and the respondent and approved by the Assistant
 Secretary, the Assistant Secretary shall conduct a review of the factual circumstances revealed as part of HUD's investigation.
 (1) If the Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity determines that, based on the totality of factual circumstances known at the
 time of the Assistant Secretary's review, no reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to
 occur, the Assistant Secretary shall: Issue a short and plain written statement of the facts upon which the Assistant Secretary has based the no
 reasonable cause determination; dismiss the complaint; notify the aggrieved person and the respondent of the dismissal (including the written
 statement of facts) by mail; and make public disclosure of the dismissal. The respondent may request that no public disclosure be made.
 Notwithstanding such a request, the fact of dismissal, including the names of the parties, shall be public information available on request. The
 Assistant Secretary's determination shall be based solely upon the facts concerning the alleged discriminatory housing practice provided by
 complainant and respondent and otherwise disclosed during the investigation. In making this determination, the Assistant Secretary shall consider
 whether the facts concerning the alleged discriminatory housing practice are sufficient to warrant the initiation of a civil action in federal court.
 (2) If, based on the totality of the factual circumstances known at the time of the decision, the Assistant Secretary believes that reasonable cause
 may exist to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the Assistant Secretary shall determine that
 reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, in all cases not involving the legality of
 local land use laws or ordinances (except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section). The Assistant Secretary's determination shall be based
 solely on the facts concerning the alleged discriminatory housing practices provided by complainants and respondents and otherwise identified
 during the investigation in making this determination. In making this determination, the Assistant Secretary shall consider whether the facts
 concerning the alleged discriminatory housing practice are sufficient to warrant the initiation of a civil action in federal court.
 (i) If the Assistant Secretary determines that reasonable cause exists, the Assistant Secretary, upon receipt of concurrence of the General Counsel,


GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 8
 will issue such determination and direct the issuance of a charge under § 103.405 on behalf of the aggrieved person, and shall notify the
 complainant and the respondent of this determination by certified mail or personal service.
 (ii) If the Assistant Secretary determines that no reasonable cause exists, the Assistant Secretary shall: Issue a short and plain written statement of
 the facts upon which the Assistant Secretary has based the no reasonable cause determination; dismiss the complaint; notify the complainant and
 the respondent of the dismissal (including the written statement of facts) by mail; and make public disclosure of the dismissal. The complainant
 or respondent may request that no public disclosure be made. Notwithstanding such a request, the fact of dismissal, including the names of the
 parties, shall be public information available on request.
 (3) If the Assistant Secretary determines that the matter involves the legality of local zoning or land use laws or ordinances, the Assistant
 Secretary, in lieu of making a determination regarding reasonable cause, shall refer the investigative material to the Attorney General for
 appropriate action under section 814(b)(1) of the Fair Housing Act, and shall notify the complainant and the respondent of this action by mail or
 personal service.
 (b) The Assistant Secretary may not issue a charge under paragraph (a) of this section regarding an alleged discriminatory housing practice, if an
 aggrieved person has commenced a civil action under an Act of Congress or a state law seeking relief with respect to the alleged housing practice
 and the trial in the action has commenced. If a charge may not be issued because of the commencement of such a trial, the Assistant Secretary
 shall so notify the complainant and the respondent by certified mail or personal service.
 (c)(1) A determination of reasonable cause or no reasonable cause by the Assistant Secretary shall be made within 100 days after filing of the
 complaint (or where the Assistant Secretary has reactivated a complaint, within 100 days after service of the notice of reactivation under §
 103.115), unless it is impracticable to do so.
 (2) If the Assistant Secretary is unable to make the determination within the 100-day period specified in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the
 Assistant Secretary will notify the complainant and the respondent by mail of the reasons for the delay.
 [55 FR 53294, Dec. 28, 1990, as amended at 57 FR 18398, Apr. 30, 1992; 59 FR 39956, Aug. 5, 1994; 59 FR 46759, Sept. 12, 1994]

 § 103.405 Issuance of charge.
 (a) A charge:
 (1) Shall consist of a short and plain written statement of the facts upon which the Assistant Secretary has found reasonable cause to believe that a
 discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur;
 (2) Shall be based on the final investigative report; and
 (3) Need not be limited to facts or grounds that are alleged in the complaint filed under subpart B of this part. If the charge is based on grounds
 that are not alleged in the complaint, HUD will not issue a charge with regard to the grounds unless the record of investigation demonstrates that
 the respondent has been given notice and an opportunity to respond to the allegation.
 (b) Within three business days after the issuance of the charge, the General Counsel shall:
 (1) Obtain a time and place for hearing from the Docket Clerk for the Office of Hearings and Appeals;
 (2) File the charge along with the notifications described in 24 CFR 180.410(b) with the Office of Hearings and Appeals;
 (3) Serve the charge and notifications in accordance with 24 CFR 180.410(a); and
 (4) Notify the Assistant Secretary of the filing of the charge.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 56 FR 55078, Oct. 24, 1991; 59 FR 39956, Aug. 5, 1994; 59 FR 46759, Sept. 12, 1994; 60 FR 58452,
 Nov. 27, 1995; 62 FR 66433, Dec. 18, 1997; 74 FR 4635, Jan. 26, 2009; 87 FR 8197, Feb. 14, 2022]

 § 103.410 Election of civil action or provision of administrative proceeding.
 (a) If a charge is issued under § 103.405, a complainant (including the Assistant Secretary, if HUD filed the complaint), a respondent, or an
 aggrieved person on whose behalf the complaint is filed may elect, in lieu of an administrative proceeding under 24 CFR part 180, to have the
 claims asserted in the charge decided in a civil action under section 812(o) of the Fair Housing Act.
 (b) The election must be made not later than 20 says after the receipt of service of the charge, or in the case of the Assistant Secretary, not later
 than 20 days after service. The notice of election must be filed with the Docket Clerk in the Office of Hearings and Appeals and served on the
 General Counsel, the Assistant Secretary, the respondent, and the aggrieved persons on whose behalf the complaint was filed. The notification
 will be filed and served in accordance with the procedures established under 24 CFR part 180.
 (c) If an election is not made under this section, the General Counsel will maintain an administrative proceeding based on the charge in
 accordance with the procedures under 24 CFR part 180.
 (d) If an election is made under this section, the General Counsel shall immediately notify and authorize the Attorney General to commence and
 maintain a civil action seeking relief under section 812(o) of the Fair Housing Act on behalf of the aggrieved person in an appropriate United
 States District Court. Such notification and authorization shall include transmission of the file in the case, including a copy of the final



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                               Page 9
 investigative report and the charge, to the Attorney General.
 (e) The General Counsel shall be available for consultation concerning any legal issues raised by the Attorney General as to how best to proceed
 in the event that a new court decision or newly discovered evidence is regarded as relevant to the reasonable cause determination.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996; 74 FR 4635, Jan. 26, 2009; 87 FR 8197, Feb. 14, 2022]

 Subpart G—Prompt Judicial Action
 § 103.500 Prompt judicial action.
 (a) If at any time following the filing of a complaint, the General Counsel concludes that prompt judicial action is necessary to carry out the
 purposes of this part or 24 CFR part 180, the General Counsel may authorize the Attorney General to commence a civil action for appropriate
 temporary or preliminary relief pending final disposition of the complaint. To ensure the prompt initiation of the civil action, the General Counsel
 will consult with the Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Rights Division before making the determination that prompt judicial action is
 necessary. The commencement of a civil action by the Attorney General under this section will not affect the initiation or continuation of
 proceedings under this part or administrative proceedings under part 180.
 (b) If the General Counsel has reason to believe that a basis exists for the commencement of proceedings against the respondent under section
 814(a) of the Fair Housing Act (Pattern or Practice Cases), proceedings under section 814(c) of the Fair Housing Act (Enforcement of
 Subpoenas), or proceedings by any governmental licensing or supervisory authorities, the General Counsel shall transmit the information upon
 which that belief is based to the Attorney General and to other appropriate authorities.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]

 Subpart H—Other Action
 § 103.510 Other action by HUD.
 In addition to the actions described in § 103.500, HUD may pursue one or more of the following courses of action:
 (a) Refer the matter to the Attorney General for appropriate action (e.g., enforcement of criminal penalties under section 811(c) of the Act).
 (b) Take appropriate steps to initiate proceedings leading to the debarment of the respondent under 2 CFR part 2424, or initiate other actions
 leading to the imposition of administrative sanctions, where HUD determines that such actions are necessary to the effective operation and
 administration of federal programs or activities.
 (c) Take appropriate steps to initiate proceedings under:
 (1) 24 CFR part 1, implementing title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964;
 (2) 24 CFR 570.912, implementing section 109 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974;
 (3) 24 CFR part 8, implementing section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973;
 (4) 24 CFR part 107, implementing Executive Order 11063; or
 (5) The Age Discrimination Act, 42 U.S.C. 6101.
 (d) Inform any other Federal, State or local agency with an interest in the enforcement of respondent's obligations with respect to
 nondiscrimination in housing.
 [54 FR 3292, Jan. 23, 1989, as amended at 72 FR 73493, Dec. 27, 2007]

 § 103.515 Action by other agencies.
 In accordance with section 808 (d) and (e) of the Fair Housing Act and Executive Order No. 12259, other Federal agencies, including any agency
 having regulatory or supervisory authority over financial institutions, are responsible for ensuring that their programs and activities relating to
 housing and urban development are administered in a manner affirmatively to further the goal of fair housing, and for cooperating with the
 Assistant Secretary in furthering the purposes of the Fair Housing Act.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                          Page 10
                                              Fair Housing Poster
 Citation: 24 C.F.R. part 110

 Authority: Tier 1 — binding federal regulation

 Applicability / trigger: Posting obligations depend on the regulated person's real-estate business and premises; pair with
 current Form HUD-928.1.

 Source: https://www.ecfr.gov/api/versioner/v1/full/2026-07-09/title-24.xml?part=110

 Currentness: Official eCFR versioned XML as of 2026-07-09; retrieved 2026-07-12.

 Retrieved: 2026-07-12



 This is a searchable rendering of an official source. It is not legal advice. The official source controls, and current law must be
 rechecked before action.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                             Page 1
 PART 110—FAIR HOUSING POSTER
 Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d), 3600-3620.
 Source: 37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972, unless otherwise noted.

 Subpart A—Purpose and Definitions
 § 110.1 Purpose.
 The regulations set forth in this part contain the procedures established by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development with respect to the
 display of a fair housing poster by persons subject to sections 804 through 806 of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. 3604-3606.
 [54 FR 3310, Jan. 23, 1989]

 § 110.5 Definitions.
 (a) The terms Department and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
 (b) Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under section 804, 805, 806, or 818 of the Act.
 (c) Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one
 or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or
 portion thereof.
 (d) Family includes a single individual.
 (e) Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual
 companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in cases under title 11 U.S.C., receivers and fiduciaries.
 (f) Fair housing poster means the poster prescribed by the Secretary for display by persons subject to sections 804-806 of the Act.
 (g) The Act means the Fair Housing Act (The Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988), 42 U.S.C.
 3600, et seq.
 (h) Person in the business of selling or renting dwellings means a person as defined in section 803(c) of the Act.
 [37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 3311, Jan. 23, 1989; 61 FR 5205, Feb. 9, 1996]

 Subpart B—Requirements for Display of Posters
 § 110.10 Persons subject.
 (a) Except to the extent that paragraph (b) of this section applies, all persons subject to section 804 of the Act, Discrimination in the Sale or
 Rental of Housing and Other Prohibited Practices, shall post and maintain a fair housing poster as follows:
 (1) With respect to a single-family dwelling (not being offered for sale or rental in conjunction with the sale or rental of other dwellings) offered
 for sale or rental through a real estate broker, agent, salesman, or person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, such person shall post and
 maintain a fair housing poster at any place of business where the dwelling is offered for sale or rental.
 (2) With respect to all other dwellings covered by the Act:
 (i) A fair housing poster shall be posted and maintained at any place of business where the dwelling is offered for sale or rental, and
 (ii) A fair housing poster shall be posted and maintained at the dwelling, except that with respect to a single-family dwelling being offered for
 sale or rental in conjunction with the sale or rental of other dwellings, the fair housing poster may be posted and maintained at the model
 dwellings instead of at each of the individual dwellings.
 (3) With respect to those dwellings to which paragraph (a)(2) of this section applies, the fair housing poster must be posted at the beginning of
 construction and maintained throughout the period of construction and sale or rental.
 (b) This part shall not require posting and maintaining a fair housing poster:
 (1) On vacant land, or
 (2) At any single-family dwelling, unless such dwelling
 (i) Is being offered for sale or rental in conjunction with the sale or rental of other dwellings in which circumstances a fair housing poster shall be
 posted and maintained as specified in paragraph (a)(2)(ii) of this section, or
 (ii) Is being offered for sale or rental through a real estate broker, agent, salesman, or person in the business of selling or renting dwellings in
 which circumstances a fair housing poster shall be posted and maintained as specified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section,



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                                 Page 2
 (c) All persons subject to section 805 of the Act, Discrimination In Residential Real Estate-Related Transactions shall post and maintain a fair
 housing poster at all their places of business which participate in the covered activities.
 (d) All persons subject to section 806 of the Act, Discrimination in the Provision of Brokerage Services, shall post and maintain a fair housing
 poster at all their places of business.
 [37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972, as amended at 54 FR 3311, Jan. 23, 1989]

 § 110.15 Location of posters.
 All fair housing posters shall be prominently displayed so as to be readily apparent to all persons seeking housing accommodations or seeking to
 engage in residential real estate-related transactions or brokerage services as contemplated by sections 804 through 806 of the Act.
 [54 FR 3311, Jan. 23, 1989]

 § 110.20 Availability of posters.
 All persons subject to this part may obtain fair housing posters from the Department's regional and area offices. A facsimile may be used if the
 poster and the lettering are equivalent in size and legibility to the poster available from the Department.
 [37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972]

 § 110.25 Description of posters.
 (a) The fair housing poster shall be 11 inches by 14 inches and shall bear the following legend:
 (The Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988)
 • In the sale or rental of housing or residential lots.
 • In advertising the sale or rental of housing.
 • In the financing of housing.
 • In the appraisal of housing.
 • In the provision of real estate brokerage services.
 • Blockbusting is also illegal.
 Anyone who feels he or she has been discriminated against should send a complaint to:
 or
 (b) The Assistant Secretary for Equal Opportunity may grant a waiver permitting the substitution of a poster prescribed by a Federal financial
 regulatory agency for the fair housing poster described in paragraph (a) of this section. While such waiver remains in effect, compliance with the
 posting requirements of such regulatory agency shall be deemed compliance with the posting requirements of this part. Such waiver shall not
 affect the applicability of all other provisions of this part.
 [37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972, as amended at 40 FR 20079, May 8, 1975; 54 FR 3311, Jan. 23, 1989]

 Subpart C—Enforcement
 § 110.30 Effect of failure to display poster.
 Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice may file a complaint with the Secretary pursuant to part 105 of
 this chapter. A failure to display the fair housing poster as required by this part shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a discriminatory housing
 practice.
 [37 FR 3429, Feb. 16, 1972]




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                            Page 3
                                                                              Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 65 / Monday, April 6, 2026 / Notices                                                 17291

                                              (August 1, 2025). The public comment                    Data Center in One Microsoft Way,                     FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Trey
                                              period ended on February 17, 2026.                      Redmond, Washington, 98052–6399.                      Tagert, Senior Advisor, Office of Fair
                                                 With respect to the first modification,              The Technology Open to Approved                       Housing and Equal Opportunity,
                                              no relevant information was omitted.                    Lenders (TOTAL) Scorecard and                         Department of Housing and Urban
                                              HUD did not receive public comments                     CHUMS, FHAC and LAMS remain at                        Development, 451 Seventh Street SW,
                                              on this modification. Accordingly, HUD                  the National Center for Critical                      Room 5100, Washington, DC 20410.
                                              will not revisit this matter. The                       Information Processing and Storage                    Telephone number (202) 402–4252
                                              modification became effective on                        located at NASA’s Shared Services                     (This is not a toll-free number.) HUD
                                              February 18, 2026, the date following                   Center, Building 1111, Stennis Space                  welcomes and is prepared to receive
                                              the end of the comment period.                          Center, MS 39529–6000.                                calls from individuals who are deaf or
                                                 With respect to the second                                                                                 hard of hearing, as well as from
                                              modification, HUD identified an error                   SYSTEM MANAGER(S):                                    individuals with speech or
                                              and is not implementing the second                        Brian Faux, Director, Office of Single-             communication disabilities. To learn
                                              modification as published for public                    Family Program Development, HUD                       more about how to make an accessible
                                              comment at 91 FR 2137. In that Notice,                  Headquarters, 451 7th Street SW,                      telephone call, please visit https://
                                              HUD identified its intent to remove the                 Washington, DC 20410; telephone (800)                 www.fcc.gov/consumers/guides/
                                              routine use ‘‘P’’ for the System of                     225–5342.                                             telecommunications-relay-service-trs.
                                              Records Notice titled ‘‘Single Family                                                                         SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
                                                                                                      ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE
                                              Mortgage Insurance Origination                          SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIES OF USERS AND             I. Background
                                              System’’ but did not identify the routine               PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:
                                              use information that would serve as the                                                                          Consistent with ongoing regulatory
                                                                                                         (P) To the U.S. Department of the                  reform efforts and in accordance with
                                              replacement.
                                                 Through this Notice, HUD intends to                  Treasury when disclosure of the                       Executive Order 14192 (‘‘Unleashing
                                              remedy this error and replace the                       information is relevant to review                     Prosperity Through Deregulation’’) 1 and
                                              second modification found in the                        payment and award eligibility through                 Executive Order 14219 (‘‘Ensuring
                                              Supplementary Information section of                    the Do Not Pay Working System for the                 Lawful Governance and Implementing
                                              the Notice published at 91 FR 2137                      purposes of identifying, preventing, or               the President’s ‘Department of
                                              with: ‘‘(2) modifies the SORN titled                    recouping improper payments to an                     Government Efficiency’ Deregulatory
                                              ‘Single Family Mortgage Insurance                       applicant for, or recipient of, Federal               Initiative’’),2 HUD is undertaking a
                                              Origination System’ last published at 90                funds, including funds disbursed by a                 comprehensive review of its sub-
                                              FR 36173 (August 1, 2025), to remove                    state (meaning a state of the United                  regulatory guidance to reduce
                                              and replace routine use ‘P: To the US                   States, the District of Columbia, a                   unnecessary compliance burdens,
                                              Department of Treasury through a                        territory or possession of the United                 enhance the effectiveness of guidance
                                              computer matching program interface                     States, or a federally recognized Indian              documents, and promote principles
                                              between CHUMS and Treasury’s Do Not                     tribe) in a state-administered, federally             underlying the rule of law. Equal
                                              Pay (DNP) system for the purposes of                    funded program.                                       treatment under the law is a bedrock
                                              preventing and recovering improper                      HISTORY:
                                                                                                                                                            principle of the United States that
                                              payments and to verify borrower                                                                               guarantees equality of opportunity, not
                                                                                                        Docket No. FR–7104–N–09, 90 FR                      equality of outcome. Historical
                                              eligibility to participate in FHA’s                     36173, (August 1, 2025).
                                              mortgage insurance programs per the                                                                           guidance, policies, and interpretive
                                              Payments Integrity Information Act of                   Shalanda L. Capehart,                                 rules of the Office of Fair Housing and
                                              2019’ with the routine use below, which                 Acting Chief Privacy Officer, Office of               Equal Opportunity inconsistent with
                                              is required by the Office of Management                 Administration.                                       this principle are subject to review,
                                              and Budget (OMB) Memorandum M–                          [FR Doc. 2026–06606 Filed 4–3–26; 8:45 am]            revision, and/or rescission.
                                              25–32, ‘Preventing Improper Payments                                                                             Agencies often issue statements that,
                                                                                                      BILLING CODE 4210–67–P
                                              and Protecting Privacy Through Do Not                                                                         unlike rules promulgated pursuant to
                                              Pay’ (August 20, 2025).’’                                                                                     legislation, do not carry the force and
                                                 HUD is reopening the deadline for                    DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND                             effect of law. These statements include
                                              public comments on the second                           URBAN DEVELOPMENT                                     interpretative rules, which advise the
                                              modification until May 6, 2026. The                                                                           public of an agency’s interpretation of
                                              action will be effective on the date                    [Docket No. FR–6571–N–01]                             the statutes and regulations it
                                              following the end of the comment                                                                              administers as well as general
                                              period unless comments are received                     Notification of Withdrawal of Fair                    statements of policy, which advise the
                                              which result in a contrary                              Housing and Equal Opportunity                         public about an agency’s intended use
                                              determination.                                          Guidance Documents                                    of its discretionary authority. These
                                                                                                                                                            non-binding guidance documents are a
                                              SYSTEM NAME AND NUMBER:                                 AGENCY: Office of Fair Housing and                    common tool for agencies to advise the
                                                                                                      Equal Opportunity, U.S. Department of                 public; however, they can sometimes be
                                                Single Family Mortgage Insurance                      Housing and Urban Development
                                              Origination System (SFMIOS), HUD/                                                                             used by agencies to attempt to bind the
                                                                                                      (HUD).                                                regulated public without adequate
                                              HSNG–03.
                                                                                                      ACTION: Notice.                                       accountability.
khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with NOTICE




                                              SECURITY CLASSIFICATION:                                                                                         HUD has issued non-binding policy
                                                                                                      SUMMARY: This notice informs the public               guidance in myriad forms over its
                                                 Unclassified.
                                                                                                      that the Office of Fair Housing and                   history. In some instances, guidance
                                              SYSTEM LOCATION:                                        Equal Opportunity (FHEO) has                          promulgated by the Office of Fair
                                               The core CHUMS system is in HUD                        withdrawn the guidance documents                      Housing and Equal Opportunity may
                                              Headquarters, 451 7th Street SW,                        identified below.
                                              Washington, DC 20410–1000, and                          DATES: Effective date of withdrawal:                    1 90 FR 9065 (January 31, 2025).

                                              Microsoft Azure Federal Cloud US East                   September 17, 2025.                                     2 90 FR 10583 (February 19, 2025).




                                         VerDate Sep<11>2014   17:08 Apr 03, 2026   Jkt 268001   PO 00000   Frm 00049   Fmt 4703   Sfmt 4703   E:\FR\FM\06APN1.SGM   06APN1
                                              17292                            Federal Register / Vol. 91, No. 65 / Monday, April 6, 2026 / Notices

                                              have adopted interpretations that are                   and/or (3) the guidance decreases                        withdrawn the guidance documents
                                              inconsistent with the statutory text and                compliance burdens.                                      identified in the table below, effective
                                              purport to impose compliance burdens                       Additionally, no reliance interests                   September 17, 2025. These documents
                                              on regulated parties outside of the                     compel retention of the guidance being                   have been removed from active use and
                                              strictures of notice-and-comment                        withdrawn. As a threshold matter,                        should not be relied upon as
                                              rulemaking. Even where the guidance                     parties understand that guidance is non-                 authoritative. Handbooks and internal
                                              might advance a permissible                             binding and does not create substantive                  training materials referencing these
                                              interpretation of the relevant statute or               rights. To the extent guidance materials                 guidance documents are being revised.
                                              regulation or has afforded the public an                or portions thereof go beyond the
                                                                                                                                                               New internal and external guidance will
                                              opportunity to weigh in, it is the                      relevant statute or regulation, they are
                                                                                                                                                               be issued where necessary and
                                                                                                      unlawful, undermining any purported
                                              Department’s current policy to issue                                                                             appropriate. All these guidance
                                                                                                      reliance interest in retaining such
                                              such guidance only when necessary and                                                                            documents have been removed from the
                                                                                                      guidance. Even where guidance is not
                                              only when issuance of such guidance                     per se unlawful, this consideration is                   HUD.gov website and should not be
                                              would reduce compliance burdens. As                     outweighed by FHEO’s policy that                         relied upon by internal or external
                                              such, FHEO has determined to                            guidance should be withdrawn unless it                   parties.
                                              withdraw all existing guidance                          is necessary and reduces compliance                         FHEO is continuing to review its need
                                              documents that fail one or more of the                  burdens.                                                 for existing guidance. Guidance that is
                                              following three criteria: (1) the guidance
                                                                                                      II. Guidance Withdrawn                                   determined to be necessary will be
                                              is statutorily prescribed, (2) the
                                                                                                                                                               reissued.
                                              interpretation set forth is consistent                     For the reasons set forth above, FHEO
                                              with the relevant statute or regulation,                is notifying the public that it has

                                                                                                                  Title                                                                            Date Issued

                                              Guidance on Application of the Fair Housing Act to the Advertising of Housing, Credit, and Other Real Estate-Related                             April 29, 2024.
                                                Transactions through Digital Platforms.
                                              FHEO 2020–01: Assessing a Person’s Request to Have an Animal as a Reasonable Accommodation Under the Fair                                        January 28, 2020.
                                                Housing Act.
                                              FHEO Memorandum on Source of Income Testing Activities under the Fair Housing Assistance Program ............................                    February 12, 2024.
                                              FHEO Notice 2013–01: Service Animals and Assistance Animals for People with Disabilities in Housing and HUD-funded                               April 25, 2013.
                                                Programs.
                                              FHEO Statement on the Fair Housing Act and Special Purpose Credit Programs ...................................................................   December 7, 2021.
                                              Final Guidance to Federal Financial Assistance Recipients Regarding Title VI Prohibition Against National Origin Discrimi-                       January 22, 2007.
                                                nation Affecting Limited English Proficient Persons.
                                              Implementation of Executive Order 13988 on the Enforcement of the Fair Housing Act ..........................................................    February 11, 2021.
                                              Implementation of OGC Guidance on Application of Fair Housing Act Standards to the Use of Criminal Records .................                     June 10, 2022.



                                                Any actions that do not comply with                   the rights of parties to seek redress in                 Records Notice (SORN) titled
                                              the text of the Fair Housing Act                        the proper court.                                        ‘‘ServiceNow (SerNow).’’
                                              continue to be subject to enforcement by                                                                            ServiceNow (SerNow) includes core
                                                                                                      Craig W. Trainor,                                        components and related modules that
                                              the Department. HUD encourages
                                              parties whose prior conduct may have                    Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing and                 work together to support key HUD
                                                                                                      Equal Opportunity.                                       operations. It facilitates helpdesk
                                              been violative of the Fair Housing Act,
                                              while in conformance with the previous                  [FR Doc. 2026–06624 Filed 4–3–26; 8:45 am]               operations, Information Technology (IT)
                                              guidance and during the period in                       BILLING CODE 4210–67–P                                   management, software and asset
                                              which that guidance was in effect, to                                                                            tracking, facilities management
                                              take immediate actions to address any                                                                            operations, Human Resources activities,
                                              such potential violation. In cases where                DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND                                and limited financial planning
                                              an entity meaningfully engages in such                  URBAN DEVELOPMENT                                        functions. HUD utilizes multiple
                                              responsible conduct, HUD intends to                                                                              ServiceNow instances, with distinct
                                                                                                      [Docket No. FR–7106–N–14]                                environments tailored to specific
                                              favorably consider such conduct, along
                                              with other relevant factors, in                                                                                  purposes such as development, testing,
                                                                                                      Privacy Act of 1974; System of
                                              considering whether and in what                                                                                  and production, each of which
                                                                                                      Records
                                              manner to pursue redress for potential                                                                           maintains detailed information
                                              violations. HUD retains, without                        AGENCY: Office of Chief Information                      regarding users and network objects.
                                              limitation, its discretion and                          Officer (OCIO), and Infrastructure and                   This structure makes it easier for
                                              responsibility to evaluate individual                   Operations (IOO), HUD.                                   employees to efficiently locate and
                                              cases of potential violations, while                    ACTION: Notice of a new system of                        utilize required resources while
                                              taking into account the specific facts                  records.                                                 ensuring system integrity across
                                              and circumstances of any given case.                                                                             operations. ServiceNow collects and
                                              Notwithstanding an enforcement                          SUMMARY: Pursuant to the provisions of                   processes information from users either
khammond on DSK9W7S144PROD with NOTICE




                                              determination by HUD, the Fair Housing                  the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended,                     through submitted forms, internal
                                              Act provides that complainants may file                 the Department of Housing and Urban                      workflows, or integrated systems via
                                              a civil action in an appropriate Federal                Development (HUD), Office of Chief                       structured data repositories. The
                                              district court or state court within two                Information Officer (OCIO) and                           information maintained within
                                              years after the occurrence or termination               Infrastructure and Operations (IOO) is                   ServiceNow is sourced from HUD
                                              of the alleged discriminatory housing                   issuing a public notice of its intent to                 systems such as Active Directory (AD)/
                                              practice. Nothing in this memo affects                  establish a Privacy Act System of                        LAN File Server (LFS), and Digital


                                         VerDate Sep<11>2014   17:08 Apr 03, 2026   Jkt 268001   PO 00000   Frm 00050     Fmt 4703   Sfmt 4703   E:\FR\FM\06APN1.SGM    06APN1
             U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
                          WASHINGTON, DC 20410-2000

ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
FAIR HOUSING AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY


MEMORANDUM FOR: FHEO Headquarters Staff, FHEO Office of Enforcement
                Staff, FHEO Regional Directors

FROM:                          Craig W. Trainor, Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing
                               and Equal Opportunity

DATE:                          May 22, 2026

SUBJECT:                       Enforcement Guidance – Assessing Requests for the Use of
                               an Animal as a Reasonable Accommodation Under the Fair
                               Housing Act.

On February 19, 2025, President Trump instructed all federal agencies to review
their enforcement activities and practices to ensure that they are necessary to
“discharge their legal obligations, protect public safety, and advance the national
interest.”1 The President further instructed agencies to “preserve their limited
enforcement resources by generally de-prioritizing actions to enforce regulations that
are based on anything other than the best reading of a statute.”2

The President of the United States exercises supervisory control over the unitary
executive branch, including the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development’s Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity (FHEO).3 FHEO is
committed to vigorously enforcing the civil rights of all Americans, including with
respect to reasonable accommodations for disabilities under the Fair Housing Act. To
execute this commitment and comply with the President’s directive, FHEO must
prioritize its limited enforcement resources.

Effective immediately, for complaints related to animal-related reasonable
accommodations, FHEO will find reasonable cause and recommend charges only for
those cases involving animals trained to provide disability-related assistance. This
guidance does not address how the Department will process complaints against


1 Exec. Order No. 14219, 90 Fed. Reg. 10583 (2025).
2 Id.
3 See Seila Law LLC v. CFPB, 591 U.S. 197, 203-4, 213 (2020) (“Under our Constitution, the executive

Power—all of it—is vested in a President, who must take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed.
Because no single person could fulfill that responsibility alone, the Framers expected that the
President would rely on subordinate officers for assistance . . . . As Madison explained, if any power
whatsoever is in its nature Executive, it is the power of appointing, overseeing, and controlling those
who execute the laws.”) (cleaned up).
housing providers under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act or the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA).

Animal-related Reasonable Accommodations

The Fair Housing Act prohibits discrimination “against any person . . . in the
provision of services or facilities in connection with [his or her] dwelling, because of a
handicap.”4 Unlawful discrimination can include “a refusal to make reasonable
accommodations in the rules, policies, practices, or services, when such
accommodation may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and
enjoy a dwelling.”5 The Department’s accompanying regulation makes clear that
waiving a no-pets policy to allow a blind person to live in an apartment with his seeing
eye dog—a trained service animal—is a required reasonable accommodation.6

To help housing providers assess a person’s request to have an animal as a reasonable
accommodation, FHEO issued guidance on January 28, 2020. Citing to a regulation
of pet ownership in public housing, the guidance emphatically declared that animals
providing “emotional support”—as well as trained service animals—“are not pets.”7
Thus, the notice explained that pet fees could not be assessed for untrained emotional
support animals (ESAs).8 It further purported to delineate “the type and amount of
documentation” a housing provider “may ask” for to (1) show a disability, and (2)
support an accommodation request for an ESA.9

Six years after this guidance issued, it remains an immense challenge to determine
whether an animal-related reasonable accommodation should be granted or denied.
Though well intentioned, the guidance failed to provide “greater clarity” on the
supposed distinction between pets and emotional support animals.10 Instead, an
entire industry has emerged to convert pets into emotional support animals.11 And
housing providers that deny a request to waive pet policies for untrained ESAs or ask


4 42 U.S.C. §3604(f)(2).
5 Id. at 3604(f)(3)(B) (emphasis added).
6 24 C.F.R. § 100.204(b).
7  FHEO Notice: FHEO-2020-01, Assessing a Person’s Request to Have an Animal as a Reasonable
Accommodation Under the Fair Housing Act, 3 (Jan. 28, 2020). But see Vorchheimer v. Philadelphian
Owners Ass’n, 903 F.3d 100, 105 (3d Cir. 2018) (The Act “requires that an accommodation be essential
to achieve equal housing opportunity, measured against any alternatives that were offered.”).
8 FHEO Notice: FHEO-2020-01, at 3.
9 Id. at 1.
10 See, e.g., Christian Britschgi, How the Fair Housing Act Gave Us Emotional Support Parrots,

REASON, Mar. 2025, https://reason.com/2025/02/02/you-cant-evict-polly/ (examining the absurdity and
confusion that has arisen by the lack of clear standards related to animal-related reasonable
accommodation requests).
11 E.g., @myemotionalsupportanimal, Get Approved for Free Today, Facebook (Apr. 18, 2026, 12:26

PM), https://www.facebook.com/myemotionalsupportanimal/videos/get-approved-for-free-today/
1120162697840187/ [https://perma.cc/WY3E-KACX]; Pettable, GET YOUR ESA LETTER IN 24 HOURS,
https://pettable.com/ [https://perma.cc/2SAH-NEX3] (last visited May 22, 2026).



                                                                                                  2
reasonable follow-up questions risk a fair housing complaint and a prolonged
investigation—despite compliance with HUD guidance. (Appendix A).12

Moreover, although framed as nonbinding best practices, the guidance had the effect
of imposing categorical fair housing obligations on housing providers without
comporting with the notice and comment requirements of the Administrative
Procedure Act.13 This is reason alone to rescind the guidance.

Prior Regulations, Guidance, and Case Law

As previously stated, the only example of an animal-related reasonable
accommodation provided in the Department’s regulations is permitting use of a dog
trained to provide a disability-related service.14 Over time, the requirement to waive
“no pets” policies for trained service animals expanded into a general injunction
against rules or conditions on untrained emotional support animals.

This evolution began in 2008, when the Department narrowed the definition of pets
within public housing to exclude assistance or support animals.15 The rule exempted
“animals that are used to assist, support, or provide service to persons with
disabilities” from limitations on pet ownership in HUD-assisted public housing.16 The
Department did not purport to impose its public housing pet rules on private owners
and operators nationwide.17

Nonetheless, some courts deferred to the Department’s public housing rule and
applied its reasoning to private housing providers.18 Relying on one such federal
district court opinion, the U.S. Department of Justice opined that “emotional support
animals that do not qualify as service animals under the [ADA] regulations may




12 Attached is an appendix with one federal district court opinion that found FHEO’s 2020 notice

unpersuasive and two examples of meritless cases involving multiple emotional support animals that
FHEO recently dismissed.
13 Perez v. Mortgage Bankers Ass’n, 575 U.S. 92, 97 (2015) (explaining interpretive rules issued without

notice and comment lack the force of law in the adjudicatory process).
14 24 C.F.R. § 100.204. See also 24 C.F.R. § 8.11.
15 Pet Ownership for the Elderly and Persons With Disabilities, 73 Fed. Reg. 63834-01 (Oct. 27, 2008);

24 CFR § 5.303.
16 24 CFR § 5.303 (emphasis added).
17 The pet policy that the Department chooses to impose on public housing providers is not necessarily

appropriate for private landlords or property managers, especially those with small portfolios.
18 Warren v. Delvista Towers Condo. Ass’n, Inc., 49 F. Supp. 3d. 1082, 1087 (S.D. Fla. 2014) (“In light

of the HUD rule, it is of no moment whether Amir [an emotional support dog] is specially trained.”);
Overlook Mutual Homes, Inc. v. Spencer, 666 F. Supp. 2d 850, 860 (S.D. Ohio 2009) (observing that
HUD’s rule applies “only to HUD-assisted public housing, as opposed [to] applying to housing
generally,” but finding that rationale of the rule supported extending it to all housing).



                                                                                                      3
nevertheless qualify as permitted reasonable accommodations for persons with
disabilities under the” Fair Housing Act.19

In 2013, the Department issued subregulatory guidance pronouncing that “any
assistance animal”—trained or untrained—must generally be admitted into
dwellings and their common use areas, without restrictions or pet fees, as a
reasonable accommodation.20 Other courts then deferred to this more robust guidance
when adjudicating “emotional support animal” reasonable accommodation claims.21
Although the most recent 2020 notice replaced the 2013 notice, it reinforced its
general rules.

Thus, through judicial deference to nonbinding agency interpretations, the legal
standards for animal-related “reasonable accommodations” under the Fair Housing
Act came to dramatically diverge from those required under the ADA. No housing
provider had an opportunity to provide comment.22 And now, over 20% of FHEO’s fair
housing complaints revolve around untrained ESAs. This cannot continue.

New Enforcement Standard and Prioritization

In a recent Fair Housing Act case, a federal court rejected a person’s reasonable
accommodation claim regarding her emotional support animal.23 When the plaintiff
invoked FHEO’s January 28, 2020, guidance in support for her position, the Court
found simply: “HUD’s Notice is unpersuasive.”24 Having carefully reviewed that
guidance, I agree. As a result, I am permanently rescinding FHEO’s 2020 notice
regarding assistance animals.25


19  Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability by Public Accommodations and in Commercial
Facilities, 75 Fed. Reg. 56236, 56240 (Sept. 15, 2010) (citing Overlook Mutual Homes, Inc. v. Spencer,
666 F. Supp. 2d 850 (S.D. Ohio 2009)).
20 FHEO-2013-01, Service Animals and Assistance Animals for People with Disabilities in Housing

and HUD-Funded Programs (Apr. 25, 2013).
21 E.g., Castellano v. Access Premier Realty, Inc., 181 F. Supp. 3d 798, 807 (E.D. Cal. 2016) (“The Court

grants HUD’s notice considerable and substantial deference.”); Bone v. Village Club, Inc., 223 F. Supp.
3d 1203, 1214 (M.D. Fla. 2016); Arnal v. Aspen View Condo. Ass’n, Inc., 226 F. Supp. 3d 1177, 1185-86
(D. Colo. 2016); Chavez v. Aber, 122 F. Supp. 3d 581, 597 n.7 (W.D. Tx. 2015); Comm’n on Human
Rights and Opportunities v. The Mansions, LLC, 231 Conn. App. 121, 144-46 (App. Ct. of Conn. 2025),
rev’d, SC 21111, 2026 WL 827929.
22 The Administrative Procedure Act’s notice and comment provision is designed “‘to ensure that

affected parties have an opportunity to participate in and influence agency decision making at an early
stage, when the agency is likely to give real consideration to alternative ideas.’” National Ass’n of Clean
Water Agencies v. EPA, 734 F.3d 1115, 1148 (D.C. Cir. 2013) (quoting New Jersey, Dep’t of
Environmental Protection v. EPA, 626 F.2d 1038, 1049 (D.C. Cir. 1980)).
23 Henderson v. Five Properties LLC, No. 24-750, 2025 WL 1951763, at *5 (E.D. La. July 16, 2025).
24 Id.
25 FHEO’s 2020 notice built upon the errors contained in the 2013 notice related to assistance animals.

Both notices were rescinded on September 17, 2025. This memorandum reconfirms those recissions
and provides further guidance on this topic.



                                                                                                         4
In the absence of HUD regulations defining animal-related reasonable
accommodations, the regulations for service animals under Titles II and III of the
ADA are instructive. Under the ADA, a service animal “is individually trained to do
work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including a
physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental disability.”26 To be a
service animal, the tasks performed by the animal “must be directly related” to the
disability.27 Common examples of disability-related tasks include “assisting
individuals who are blind or have low vision with navigation,” “alerting individuals
who are deaf or hard of hearing to the presence of people or sounds,” “assisting an
individual during a seizure,” “retrieving items,” “providing physical support and
assistance with balance and stability,” and “helping persons with psychiatric and
neurological disabilities.”28 But “the provision of emotional support, well-being,
comfort, or companionship do not constitute work or tasks for the purposes of this
definition.”29

Going forward, FHEO will use the training component of the ADA’s definition for
service animals to assess animal-related reasonable accommodation complaints
under the Fair Housing Act.30 Applying similar reasonable accommodation standards
between the Fair Housing Act and Titles II and III of the ADA will provide improved
clarity and predictability for tenants and housing providers alike. As a corollary,
defining an assistance animal as an animal trained to assist with a disability is the
best guarantee of evenhanded enforcement of the Fair Housing Act.

In light of these standards, FHEO will find reasonable cause for failure to provide a
reasonable accommodation involving the waiver of a pet policy only where the animal
has been individually trained to perform work or perform tasks directly related to the
complainant’s disability.

While requests to waive pet policies for animals trained to perform specific disability-
related services are presumptively reasonable, requests to waive pet policies for
untrained ESAs are not.31 FHEO no longer expects housing providers to categorically
extend accommodations for trained assistance animals to untrained ESAs. By
prioritizing the most meritorious cases involving trained assistance animals, FHEO
can responsibly utilize its enforcement discretion32 to deploy enforcement resources

26 28 C.F.R. §§ 35.104, 36.104.
27 Id.
28 Id.
29 Id.
30 Unlike Titles II and III of the ADA, an animal-related reasonable accommodation under the Fair

Housing Act could involve a species other than a dog, provided the animal is trained to perform a
disability-related service.
31 See Revock v. Cowpet Bay West Condo. Ass’n, 853 F.3d 96, 110 (3d Cir. 2017) (“In emotional support

animal cases, a housing provider may contest whether the accommodation is reasonable.”).
32 United States v. Texas, 599 U.S. 670, 685 (2023) (holding that Article III courts cannot “order the

Executive Branch to take enforcement actions against violators of federal law”); see Citizens for Resp.



                                                                                                     5
consistent with the best reading of the law.33

Given this posture, Regional Directors must send all open emotional support animal
cases to Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for Enforcement and Programs Robert A.
Doles for a case-by-case determination on the merits.

Notwithstanding the Department’s enforcement determination in a given case, the
Fair Housing Act provides that a complainant may file a civil action in an appropriate
federal district court or state court within two years after the occurrence or
termination of the alleged discriminatory housing practice.34 Nothing in this
enforcement guidance affects the rights of parties to seek redress through a private
action in court.

Future Rulemaking

The language and definitions in the ADA regulations have changed over time, but
HUD’s regulations for animal-related reasonable accommodations by private housing
providers have not been updated in 35 years.35 The Department intends to engage in
notice and comment rulemaking regarding animal-related reasonable
accommodations, with the aim of harmonizing our regulations, to the maximum
extent possible, with those of the ADA.

Whether a particular accommodation is reasonable under the circumstances is the
type of fact-intensive, case-specific determination that would benefit from notice and
comment rulemaking. With public input from private as well as public housing
providers, the Department will be better positioned to develop a sound approach to
case-by-case determinations.36 Although a “case-by-case determination” inherently
implies individual assessment, regulations can be designed and implemented to
streamline and simplify determinations while balancing the interests of housing
providers and disabled Americans.




& Ethics in Wash. v. FEC, 993 F.3d 880, 887-88 (D.C. Cir. 2021) (“The general principle that an
agency’s exercise of enforcement discretion is unreviewable follows from tradition, case law, and sound
reasoning as well as protection for a core executive power. The vesting of all executive power in the
President as well as his constitutional obligation ‘to take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed’
has been understood to leave enforcement and nonenforcement decisions exclusively with the
Executive Branch.”) (cleaned up).
33 Exec. Order No. 14219, 90 Fed. Reg. 10583 (2025).
34 42 U.S.C. 3613(a)(1)(A).
35 Implementation of the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, 54 Fed. Reg. 3289 (Jan. 23, 1989);

24 C.F.R. § 100.204(b).
36 See United States v. Cain, 583 F.3d 408, 420 (6th Cir. 2009) (“The primary purpose of Congress in

imposing notice and comment requirements for rulemaking is to get public input so as to get the wisest
rules.”) (cleaned up).



                                                                                                     6
                                    Appendix

      This appendix includes reference materials that either inform or reflect the
Department’s current approach to animal-related reasonable accommodation
requests under the Fair Housing Act.

      Exhibit A is a recent federal district court decision, Henderson v. Five
Properties LLC, No. 24-750, 2025 WL 1951763, at *1 (E.D. La. July 16, 2025), that
declined to follow the rules announced in the now-rescinded FHEO notices on
emotional support animals. In July 2025, the court held that waiver of a generally-
applicable pet fee for an emotional support animal was neither reasonable nor
necessary, which are required elements of a reasonable accommodation claim.

        Exhibit B is a no reasonable cause determination (NRC) that dismissed a
complaint involving three emotional support animals supported by an online form
letter. Filed in February 2024, the matter led to a preliminary conciliation agreement
that would have required the respondents to obtain fair housing training and amend
their pet policies. The investigative file, however, warranted an NRC, which FHEO
issued in April 2026.

      Exhibit C is another NRC that dismissed a complaint involving dozens of
animals of different species that were claimed as emotional support animals. Filed in
March 2024, the case had not been resolved as of March 2026. FHEO issued the NRC
in April 2026.




                                                                                    7
Exhibit A
(205)ypCoilS,LesrtPvF. ndH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           205WL19763
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OnlytheWsawciourvb.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              UnitedStatesDistricCourt,E.D.Louisan.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MichaelHENDERSON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    v.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FIVEPROPERTIESLCandSuzaneTonti

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CIVILACTIONNO.24-750
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SignedJuly16,205



                         aceAm sxil ,aeR M. aiucL rkshelB, niaR ylMo Grdn, asiouL rF ngHousi tiAc on Cente, r New Orns,ael AL
                          sDr
                           eMyl we rdIn                                                              ousa,B eniR juwyaryL Chkears,L A,fosLerla rson.deHalhcMi

                             Elzai bethA.,louseRkLrdaGyHmnP,NewOrns,aelALforveFi PropertiseCL ndaSuzane
                             Tonti.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SECTION“R”(4)




                          SAAHS.R VANCE,UNITEDSTATESDISTRICTJUDGE

                                           Defentsda veFi Propertis,e C,L Suzane                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tonti, nda APMT ntemgaM Servis,ec CL ovem for yamsu juntedgm
  plngsimd ntiia ffrson'sdeH alhcMi bl
                                    sonare tiodamcthtA erungHsithmalcFdEqu
                                                                oneasiuL e la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                Oppo
                ngHousi rtutyni t.Ac                                                                                                                                                                                                             Defentsda ovem sla fojuryamsu ntedgm thon br
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rie ofhcae ontrc tca nstiga mlc plntiia ff.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                         Plntiia ff oppose the otim on.                                                                                                                                                                                                                   For the foowil ng son,are the Court ntsgra fede ntsda ’ otim ons for ryamsu juntedgm on
                         plntiia ff'sblsonare tiodamce stheimnd,aloc ngstaiamre tewa-l swimialc thoutprjue .ecdi




                         ThCoe urtviresha wee thd tedenaorc thdneirm fae tsc fosare owsl In
                                                                                         . Ju2022,      yl                          plntiia ffpplarsondeHlhcMi dei
                         to seal na paa rtmnte ta ondTrmAl e Apartmntse ni ,harH nsiouL whhci si ownde by veFi Propertise nda genam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4
                         by Suzane Tonti nda APMT ntemgaM Servis,ec C.L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              In the ppla tiaci on, rsdeH tated thta she da dog emna
                                                                                                                                  5
                          Tydus.                                                                                                                                rsondeHtedreasltoveil ta ondtrmAl eApartmntse throughNovebe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         m r30,2023,ndapadiafunore bl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   nda e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                        felamni ofe $350.

                             In Novebe
                                    m r 2023, rsondeH nqui drei bo
                                                                a ut ovim ng ntoi notha re one of veFi Propertis’
                                                                                                                e paa rtmnte plomc sxe dgnam
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7
                             by fede ntsda , Sukeanl Apartmntse .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         As part of the ppla tiaci on, rsdeH qustee d thta the funor bl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nda e $400 lamni
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8
                         fee be wavei d beuseac of Tydus's otime lona support lamni (“ESA”) status.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               In support of thsi qure st,e rsondeH ted ni
                         rhe ppla tiaci on thta Tydus psek rhe mlac nd stabl,e thta he sa ntaumdoc tion, da thta she i ttig ng orem taudc tion
                                                                                        9
                         ni Debe
                             mec . r                                                               On Debe        mec r 26, 2023, rsondeH ubmttei d a tteel r from Steph ,eL na dvaenc prtica ec stegir dre nus
                         (“APRN”),whstao tethd ta tsemrsondH thfee tericlade toari qure ste bl
                                                                                            sonare tiodamce ofn bepaomcangi deni



                                                                                                                                                                                      orksWvenmtG.SUigalcNsRuhT206© .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
(205)ypCoilS,LesrtPvF. ndH


                                                                                             10
                          by rhe ESA.                                                                             Spefiic , ylaceL found thta rsondeH ha ntaem Fe
                                                                                                                                                               l otim lona tidic on zegicre d ni the Dignostia c nda
                          Statistilac lnuaM of ntaMe l Dirsode thta duseac bi
                                                                           sadi tyil sa fide dne by the nsacrieAm with Dibi                  sa tiil se t,Ac nda thta
                        dstoeronH veha rESA
                                        he paomca rtonyhe provifeilrd frptosymo sfrm ntaermho Fe
                                                                                              l otim bi
                                                                                                     sadilon tyil                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           . 11

                         Shortlyfte
                                a rviiec ngthettel ,Tor ntinotifidersonHthta Tydusolcvei withrhefi shepadithefunor bl                      nda leamni
                         febu,e tno dha se provisuffi
                                                  de nteic nfoi tiarm toon onstrmde tea notdulc she njothy ofuse thpaa e rtmnte withoutwaa vei r
                                                                                                                                                                12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13
                         ofthfelamni e .e                                                                                                                            Tontinotethd ta thprrsondeHc oviteacndi e thd ta suffi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        dhae nteic toeomnci pathy fee .e

                                                                   ttoaAn foyrne Tor ntintemgaM ntse tteel arsondH Jaonr 4,rynua 2024,tiacunimo Tong ntint's
                                                                                                                                                       emgaM lanide
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14
                             ofthe$400lamnifeewavei . r                                                                                                                                                                                                    Henotedthta theLttel rdinotprovidesuffinteic bl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ailre enfoi tiarm onthta rsondeHi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                         bl
                         sadi de or thta thre si a xusne betwene the suppodse bi                   ai tyil nda the dog hsuc thta the lamni s qure d.rei                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Furth, reh
                           statedthta thresitinoacd onthta rsondetHac que ylausendjoythepaa rtmnte withoutwavei rofthefeebeuseac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16
                         rhefilaincfotiarm onteacdi sheaqud tea eomncitopaythe$400fe.e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OnJarynua9,2024,rsondeHlca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 17
                         rhe Sukeanl Apartmntse ppla tiaci on.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   On hrcMa 25, 2024, rsondeH fidel tsui runde the riFa ngHous tsedmA tAc
                            (“FHA”), nda the nasiouL Equla ngHousi Opportutyni tAc ngkies a torlcde ry junt,edgm a pentearm njui tinc on, da
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         18
                        ,lraneg spefiic ,c nda putini ve s.geamd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              In fede ntsda ’ nswea , r thye dam ountec mialrc nstg plntiia ff for brhcae of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              19
                         ontrc tca ngoutsira ofdunpagela ntdrei dby
                                                                 useacgmn plntiia f                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 f'sdog.

                             Defentsda now ovem for yamsu juntedgm on plntiia ff's bl
                                                                                   sonare e tiodamc ons ,mialc rtese d rune 42 U.S.C. G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                             3604(f)(3)(b)
                                        v.eR .aL nd Stat.G51H2606(A)(6)(a)(i).i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tiAdi fede , ylona ntsda ovem fojuryamsu ntedgm thon brrie hcae
                                                                                                                                                                21
                         ofontrc tca .mialc

                          ThCoe urtrsthdeonic otime onbeow.l




                   Sujuryam ntedgm si                                                                                                                                             wantera d                                                                                  wh“th  ne ovam e ntshowsthta thspudi neug o si retetosa tem nya falari tc thnda ovam e nt
            ntiesi tltode juntedgm tteam s ofr w.al ”Ci.RdFe v.P.56(a)I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              te raC. vorp.Cxetl sa                                                                               477
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,    U.S.317,322-23(1986)I
orp.CiAdquL veltLi                                                                                                                                                                          37
                                                                                                                                                                                            , .3dF 1069,1075(5thCi1994)                                                                                                                                                .r        (eba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n )nc (pe).mauric “Jhwhngsiea the spudiare tetonya
               team falari tc stsxie Kth          , Coe urtLrKs             deonsic Lofla thvie thni bu
                                                                                                 ecd or e tfrre nKs    ia Lfrbi               direc ngkam o tyil tede tinairm ons
            weor thnghi vie .”encd                                                                                                                                                            Ins. ebuigrA dowatN . v o.C Land eiP & atlD                                                                                                                                                                                                            530
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,                        .3dF 395,398-99(5thCi2008)            .r                    (ctii ng
                   Re.Sasev rsondeumblP ods.,ngirP Inc.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,530U.S.133,150(2000)Inda                                               Masuhi
