GH Real Estate approved legal-source text chunk — GH-FED-03_CONDITIONAL-HUD-HCV-VAWA-Section504-Programs.part-003.txt — verified through 2026-07-12. Official source text controls.

 assistance under the pilot program (whether or not the PHA has also decided to offer the homeownership option).
 (b) Applicability of homeownership option requirements. Except as provided in this section, all of the regulations applicable to the
 homeownership option (as described in §§ 982.625 through 982.641) are also applicable to the pilot program.
 (c) Initial eligibility requirements. Before commencing homeownership assistance under the pilot program for a family, the PHA must determine
 that all of the following initial requirements have been satisfied:
 (1) The family is a disabled family (as defined in § 5.403 of this title);
 (2) The family annual income does not exceed 99 percent of the median income for the area;
 (3) The family is not a current homeowner;
 (4) The family must close on the purchase of the home during the period starting on July 23, 2001 and ending on July 23, 2004; and
 (5) The family meets the initial requirements described in § 982.626; however, the following initial requirements do not apply to a family seeking
 to participate in the pilot program:
 (i) The income eligibility requirements of § 982.201(b)(1);
 (ii) The first-time homeowner requirements of § 982.627(b); and
 (iii) The mortgage default requirements of § 982.627(e), if the PHA determines that the default is due to catastrophic medical reasons or due to



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                         Page 74
 the impact of a federally declared major disaster or emergency.
 (d) Amount and distribution of homeownership assistance payments. (1) While the family is residing in the home, the PHA shall calculate a
 monthly homeownership assistance payment on behalf of the family in accordance with § 982.635 and this section.
 (2) A family that is a low income family (as defined at 24 CFR 5.603(b)) as determined by HUD shall receive the full amount of the monthly
 homeownership assistance payment calculated under § 982.635.
 (3) A family whose annual income is greater than the low income family ceiling but does not exceed 89 percent of the median income for the area
 as determined by HUD shall receive a monthly homeownership assistance payment equal to 66 percent of the amount calculated under § 982.635.
 (4) A family whose annual income is greater than the 89 percent ceiling but does not exceed 99 percent of the median income for the area as
 determined by HUD shall receive a monthly homeownership assistance payment equal to 33 percent of the amount calculated under § 982.635.
 (5) A family whose annual income is greater than 99 percent of the median income for the area shall not receive homeownership assistance under
 the pilot program.
 (e) Assistance payments to lender. The PHA must make homeownership assistance payments to a lender on behalf of the disabled family. If the
 assistance payment exceeds the amount due to the lender, the PHA must pay the excess directly to the family. The provisions of § 982.635(d),
 which permit the PHA to make monthly homeownership assistance payments directly to the family, do not apply to the pilot program.
 (f) Mortgage defaults. The requirements of § 982.638(d) regarding mortgage defaults are applicable to the pilot program. However,
 notwithstanding § 982.638(d), the PHA may, in its discretion, permit a family that has defaulted on its mortgage to move to a new unit with
 continued voucher homeownership assistance if the PHA determines that the default is due to catastrophic medical reasons or due to the impact
 of a federally declared major disaster or emergency. The requirements of §§ 982.627(a)(5) and 982.627(e) do not apply to such a family.
 [66 FR 33613, June 22, 2001]

 § 982.643 Homeownership option: Downpayment assistance grants.
 (a) General. (1) A PHA may provide a single downpayment assistance grant for a participant that has received tenant-based or project-based
 rental assistance in the Housing Choice Voucher Program.
 (2) The downpayment assistance grant must be applied toward the downpayment required in connection with the purchase of the home and/or
 reasonable and customary closing costs in connection with the purchase of the home.
 (3) If the PHA permits the downpayment grant to be applied to closing costs, the PHA must define what fees and charges constitute reasonable
 and customary closing costs. However, if the purchase of a home is financed with FHA mortgage insurance, such financing is subject to FHA
 mortgage insurance requirements, including any requirements concerning closing costs (see § 982.632(b) of this part regarding the applicability
 of FHA requirements to voucher homeownership assistance and § 203.27 of this title regarding allowable fees, charges and discounts for
 FHA-insured mortgages).
 (b) Maximum downpayment grant. A downpayment assistance grant may not exceed twelve times the difference between the payment standard
 and the total tenant payment.
 (c) Payment of downpayment grant. The downpayment assistance grant shall be paid at the closing of the family's purchase of the home.
 (d) Administrative fee. For each downpayment assistance grant made by the PHA, HUD will pay the PHA a one-time administrative fee in
 accordance with § 982.152(a)(1)(iii).
 (e) Return to tenant-based assistance. A family that has received a downpayment assistance grant may apply for and receive tenant-based rental
 assistance, in accordance with program requirements and PHA policies. However, the PHA may not commence tenant-based rental assistance for
 occupancy of the new unit so long as any member of the family owns any title or other interest in the home purchased with homeownership
 assistance. Further, eighteen months must have passed since the family's receipt of the downpayment assistance grant.
 (f) Implementation of downpayment assistance grants. A PHA may not offer downpayment assistance under this paragraph until HUD publishes
 a notice in the Federal Register.
 [67 FR 64494, Oct. 18, 2002]




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                       Page 75
 Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs of
                        HUD
 Citation: 24 C.F.R. part 1

 Authority: Tier 1 — binding federal regulation; federal-assistance dependent

 Applicability / trigger: Conditional: applies to recipients of federal financial assistance from HUD under Title VI.

 Source: https://www.ecfr.gov/api/versioner/v1/full/2026-07-09/title-24.xml?part=1

 Currentness: Official eCFR versioned XML as of 2026-07-09; retrieved 2026-07-12.

 Retrieved: 2026-07-12



 This is a searchable rendering of an official source. It is not legal advice. The official source controls, and current law must be
 rechecked before action.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                             Page 1
 PART 1—NONDISCRIMINATION IN FEDERALLY ASSISTED PROGRAMS OF
 THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
 DEVELOPMENT—EFFECTUATION OF TITLE VI OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT
 OF 1964
 Authority: 42 U.S.C. 2000d-1 and 3535(d).
 Source: 38 FR 17949, July 5, 1973, unless otherwise noted.

 § 1.1 Purpose.
 The purpose of this part 1 is to effectuate the provisions of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (hereafter referred to as the Act ) to the end that
 no person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of,
 or be otherwise subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from the Department of Housing
 and Urban Development.

 § 1.2 Definitions.
 As used in this part 1—
 (a) The term Department means the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
 (b) The term Secretary means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
 (c) The term responsible Department official means the Secretary or, to the extent of any delegation of authority by the Secretary to act under this
 part 1, any other Department official to whom the Secretary may hereafter delegate such authority.
 (d) The term United States means the States of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa,
 Guam, Wake Island, the Canal Zone, and the territories and possessions of the United States, and the term State means any one of the foregoing.
 (e) The term Federal financial assistance includes: (1) Grants, loans, and advances of Federal funds, (2) the grant or donation of Federal property
 and interests in property, (3) the detail of Federal personnel, (4) the sale and lease of, and the permission to use (on other than a casual or transient
 basis), Federal property or any interest in such property without consideration or at a nominal consideration, or at a consideration which is
 reduced for the purpose of assisting the recipient, or in recognition of the public interest to be served by such sale or lease to the recipient, and (5)
 any Federal agreement, arrangement, or other contract which has as one of its purposes the provision of assistance. The term Federal financial
 assistance does not include a contract of insurance or guaranty.
 (f) The term recipient means any State, political subdivision of any State, or instrumentality of any State or political subdivision, any public or
 private agency, institution, organization, or other entity, or any individual, in any State, to whom Federal financial assistance is extended, directly
 or through another recipient, for any program or activity, or who otherwise participates in carrying out such program or activity (such as a
 redeveloper in the Urban Renewal Program), including any successor, assign, or transferee thereof, but such term does not include any ultimate
 beneficiary under any such program or activity.
 (g) The term applicant means one who submits an application, contract, request, or plan requiring Department approval as a condition to
 eligibility for Federal financial assistance, and the term application means such an application, contract, request, or plan.

 § 1.3 Application of part 1.
 This part 1 applies to any program or activity for which Federal financial assistance is authorized under a law administered by the Department. It
 applies to money paid, property transferred, or other Federal financial assistance extended to any such program or activity on or after January 3,
 1965. This part 1 does not apply to: (a) Any Federal financial assistance by way of insurance or guaranty contracts, (b) money paid, property
 transferred, or other assistance extended to any such program or activity before January 3, 1965, (c) any assistance to any person who is the
 ultimate beneficiary under any such program or activity, or (d) any employment practice, under any such program or activity, of any employer,
 employment agency, or labor organization, except to the extent described in § 1.4(c).
 [38 FR 17949, July 5, 1973, as amended at 83 FR 26360, June 7, 2018]

 § 1.4 Discrimination prohibited.
 (a) General. No person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the
 benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination under any program or activity to which this part 1 applies.
 (b) Specific discriminatory actions prohibited. (1) A recipient under any program or activity to which this part 1 applies may not, directly or
 through contractual or other arrangements, on the ground of race, color, or national origin:
 (i) Deny a person any housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits provided under the program or activity;
 (ii) Provide any housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits to a person which are different, or are provided in a


GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                                 Page 2
 different manner, from those provided to others under the program or activity;
 (iii) Subject a person to segregation or separate treatment in any matter related to his receipt of housing, accommodations, facilities, services,
 financial aid, or other benefits under the program or activity;
 (iv) Restrict a person in any way in access to such housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits, or in the
 enjoyment of any advantage or privilege enjoyed by others in connection with such housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid,
 or other benefits under the program or activity;
 (v) Treat a person differently from others in determining whether he satisfies any occupancy, admission, enrollment, eligibility, membership, or
 other requirement or condition which persons must meet in order to be provided any housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid,
 or other benefits provided under the program or activity;
 (vi) Deny a person opportunity to participate in the program or activity through the provision of services or otherwise, or afford him an
 opportunity to do so which is different from that afforded others under the program or activity (including the opportunity to participate in the
 program or activity as an employee but only to the extent set forth in paragraph (c) of this section).
 (vii) Deny a person the opportunity to participate as a member of a planning or advisory body which is an integral part of the program.
 (2)(i) A recipient, in determining the types of housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits which will be
 provided under any such program or activity, or the class of persons to whom, or the situations in which, such housing, accommodations,
 facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits will be provided under any such program or activity, or the class of persons to be afforded an
 opportunity to participate in any such program or activity, may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, utilize criteria or
 methods of administration which have the effect of subjecting persons to discrimination because of their race, color, or national origin, or have
 the effect of defeating or substantially impairing accomplishment of the objectives of the program or activity as respect to persons of a particular
 race, color, or national origin.
 (ii) A recipient, in operating low-rent housing with Federal financial assistance under the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended (42
 U.S.C. 1401 et seq. ), shall assign eligible applicants to dwelling units in accordance with a plan, duly adopted by the recipient and approved by
 the responsible Department official, providing for assignment on a community-wide basis in sequence based upon the date and time the
 application is received, the size or type of unit suitable, and factors affecting preference or priority established by the recipient's regulations,
 which are not inconsistent with the objectives of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and this part 1. The plan may allow an applicant to refuse
 a tendered vacancy for good cause without losing his standing on the list but shall limit the number of refusals without cause as prescribed by the
 responsible Department official.
 (iii) The responsible Department official is authorized to prescribe and promulgate plans, exceptions, procedures, and requirements for the
 assignment and reassignment of eligible applicants and tenants consistent with the purpose of paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section, this part 1, and
 title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, in order to effectuate and insure compliance with the requirements imposed thereunder.
 (3) In determining the site or location of housing, accommodations, or facilities, an applicant or recipient may not make selections with the
 purpose or effect of excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or subjecting them to discrimination under any program to which
 this part 1 applies, on the ground of race, color, or national origin; or with the purpose or effect of defeating or substantially impairing the
 accomplishment of the objectives of the Act or this part 1.
 (4) As used in this part 1 the housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits provided under a program or activity
 receiving Federal financial assistance shall be deemed to include any housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other
 benefits provided in or through a facility provided with the aid of Federal financial assistance.
 (5) The enumeration of specific forms of prohibited discrimination in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section does not limit the generality of the
 prohibition in paragraph (a) of this section.
 (6)(i) In administering a program regarding which the recipient has previously discriminated against persons on the ground of race, color, or
 national origin, the recipient must take affirmative action to overcome the effects of prior discrimination.
 (ii) Even in the absence of such prior discrimination, a recipient in administering a program should take affirmative action to overcome the effects
 of conditions which resulted in limiting participation by persons of a particular race, color, or national origin.
 Where previous discriminatory practice or usage tends, on the ground of race, color, or national origin, to exclude individuals from participation
 in, to deny them the benefits of, or to subject them to discrimination under any program or activity to which this part 1 applies, the applicant or
 recipient has an obligation to take reasonable action to remove or overcome the consequences of the prior discriminatory practice or usage, and to
 accomplish the purpose of the Act.
 (c) Employment practices. (1) Where a primary objective of the Federal financial assistance to a program or activity to which this part 1 applies is
 to provide employment, a recipient may not, directly or through contractual or other arrangements, subject a person to discrimination on the
 ground of race, color, or national origin in its employment practices under such program or activity (including recruitment or recruitment
 advertising, employment, layoff, termination, upgrading, demotion, transfer, rates of pay or other forms of compensation and use of facilities).
 The requirements applicable to construction employment under such program or activity shall be those specified in or pursuant to part III of
 Executive Order 11246 or any executive order which supersedes or amends it.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 3
 (2) Where a primary objective of the Federal financial assistance is not to provide employment, but discrimination on the ground of race, color, or
 national origin in the employment practices of the recipient or other persons subject to this part 1 tends, on the ground of race, color, or national
 origin, to exclude individuals from participation in, to deny them the benefits of, or to subject them to discrimination under any program to which
 this part 1 applies, the provisions of this paragraph (c) shall apply to the employment practices of the recipient or other persons subject to this part
 1 to the extent necessary to assure equality of opportunity to, and nondiscriminatory treatment of, beneficiaries.

 § 1.5 Assurances required.
 (a) General. (1) Every contract for Federal financial assistance to carry out a program or activity to which this part 1 applies, executed on or after
 January 3, 1965, and every application for such Federal financial assistance submitted on or after January 3, 1965, shall, as a condition to its
 approval and the extension of any Federal financial assistance pursuant to such contract or application, contain or be accompanied by an
 assurance that the program or activity will be conducted and the housing, accommodations, facilities, services, financial aid, or other benefits to
 be provided will be operated and administered in compliance with all requirements imposed by or pursuant to this part 1. In the case of a contract
 or application where the Federal financial assistance is to provide or is in the form of personal property or real property or interest therein or
 structures thereon, the assurance shall obligate the recipient or, in the case of a subsequent transfer, the transferee, for the period during which the
 property is used for a purpose for which the Federal financial assistance is extended or for another purpose involving the provision of similar
 services or benefits, or for as long as the recipient retains ownership or possession of the property, whichever is longer. In all other cases the
 assurance shall obligate the recipient for the period during which Federal financial assistance is extended pursuant to the contract or application.
 The responsible Department official shall specify the form of the foregoing assurance for such program or activity, and the extent to which like
 assurances will be required of subgrantees, contractors and subcontractors, transferees, successors in interest, and other participants in the
 program or activity. Any such assurance shall include provisions which give the United States a right to seek its judicial enforcement.
 (2) In the case of real property, structures or improvements thereon, or interests therein, acquired through a program of Federal financial
 assistance the instrument effecting any disposition by the recipient of such real property, structures or improvements thereon, or interests therein,
 shall contain a covenant running with the land assuring nondiscrimination for the period during which the real property is used for a purpose for
 which the Federal financial assistance is extended or for another purpose involving the provision of similar services or benefits. In the case where
 Federal financial assistance is provided in the form of a transfer of real property or interests therein from the Federal Government, the instrument
 effecting or recording the transfer shall contain such a covenant.
 (3) In program receiving Federal financial assistance in the form, or for the acquisition, of real property or an interest in real property, to the
 extent that rights to space on, over, or under any such property are included as part of the program receiving such assistance, the
 nondiscrimination requirements of this part 1 shall extend to any facility located wholly or in part in such space.
 (b) Preexisting contracts—funds not disbursed. In any case where a contract for Federal financial assistance, to carry out a program or activity to
 which this part 1 applies, has been executed prior to January 3, 1965, and the funds have not been fully disbursed by the Department, the
 responsible Department official shall, where necessary to effectuate the purposes of this part 1, require an assurance similar to that provided in
 paragraph (a) of this section as a condition to the disbursement of further funds.
 (c) Preexisting contracts—periodic payments. In any case where a contract for Federal financial assistance, to carry out a program or activity to
 which this part 1 applies, has been executed prior to January 3, 1965, and provides for periodic payments for the continuation of the program or
 activity, the recipient shall, in connection with the first application for such periodic payments on or after January 3, 1965: (1) Submit a statement
 that the program or activity is being conducted in compliance with all requirements imposed by or pursuant to this part 1 and (2) provide such
 methods of administration for the program or activity as are found by the responsible Department official to give reasonable assurance that the
 recipient will comply with all requirements imposed by or pursuant to this part 1.
 (d) Assurances from institutions. (1) In the case of any application for Federal financial assistance to an institution of higher education, the
 assurance required by this section shall extend to admission practices and to all other practices relating to the treatment of students.
 (2) The assurance required with respect to an institution of higher education, hospital, or any other institution, insofar as the assurance relates to
 the institution's practices with respect to admission or other treatment of persons as students, patients, or clients of the institution or to the
 opportunity to participate in the provision of services or other benefits to such persons, shall be applicable to the entire institution unless the
 applicant establishes, to the satisfaction of the responsible Department official, that the institution's practices in designated parts or programs of
 the institution will in no way affect its practices in the program of the institution for which Federal financial assistance is sought, or the
 beneficiaries of or participants in such program. If in any such case the assistance sought is for the construction of a facility or part of a facility,
 the assurance shall in any event extend to the entire facility and to facilities operated in connection therewith.
 (e) Elementary and secondary schools. The requirements of this section with respect to any elementary or secondary school or school system
 shall be deemed to be satisfied if such school or school system (1) is subject to a final order of a court of the United States for the desegregation
 of such school or school system, and provides an assurance that it will comply with such order, including any future modification of such order,
 or (2) submits a plan for the desegregation of such school or school system which the responsible official of the Department of Health and Human
 Services determines is adequate to accomplish the purposes of the Act and this part 1 within the earliest practicable time, and provides reasonable
 assurance that it will carry out such plan.
 [38 FR 17949, July 5, 1973, as amended at 50 FR 9269, Mar. 7, 1985]




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                                   Page 4
 § 1.6 Compliance information.
 (a) Cooperation and assistance. The responsible Department official and each Department official who by law or delegation has the principal
 responsibility within the Department for the administration of any law extending financial assistance subject to this part 1 shall to the fullest
 extent practicable seek the cooperation of recipients in obtaining compliance with this part 1 and shall provide assistance and guidance to
 recipients to help them comply voluntarily with this part 1.
 (b) Compliance reports. Each recipient shall keep such records and submit to the responsible Department official or his designee timely,
 complete, and accurate compliance reports at such times, and in such form and containing such information, as the responsible Department
 official or his designee may determine to be necessary to enable him to ascertain whether the recipient has complied or is complying with this
 part 1. In general, recipients should have available for the department racial and ethnic data showing the extent to which members of minority
 groups are beneficiaries of federally assisted programs.
 (c) Access to sources of information. Each recipient shall permit access by the responsible Department official or his designee during normal
 business hours to such of its books, records, accounts, and other sources of information, and its facilities as may be pertinent to ascertain
 compliance with this part 1. Where any information required of a recipient is in the exclusive possession of any other agency, institution, or
 person and this agency, institution, or person shall fail or refuse to furnish this information, the recipient shall so certify in its report and shall set
 forth what efforts it has made to obtain the information.
 (d) Information to beneficiaries and participants. Each recipient shall make available to participants, beneficiaries, and other interested persons
 such information regarding the provisions of this part 1 and its applicability to the program or activity under which the recipient receives Federal
 financial assistance, and make such information available to them in such manner, as the responsible Department official finds necessary to
 apprise such persons of the protections against discrimination assured them by the Act and this part 1.

 § 1.7 Conduct of investigations.
 (a) Periodic compliance reviews. The responsible Department official or his designee shall from time to time review the practices of recipients to
 determine whether they are complying with this part 1.
 (b) Complaints. Any person who believes himself or any specific class of persons to be subjected to discrimination prohibited by this part 1 may
 by himself or by a representative file with the responsible Department official or his designee a written complaint. A complaint must be filed not
 later than 180 days from the date of the alleged discrimination, unless the time for filing is extended by the responsible Department official or his
 designee.
 (c) Investigations. The responsible Department official or his designee shall make a prompt investigation whenever a compliance review, report,
 complaint, or any other information indicates a possible failure to comply with this part 1. The investigation should include, where appropriate, a
 review of the pertinent practices and policies of the recipient, the circumstances under which the possible noncompliance with this part 1
 occurred, and other factors relevant to a determination as to whether the recipient has failed to comply with this part .
 (d) Resolution of matters. (1) If an investigation pursuant to paragraph (c) of this section indicates a failure to comply with this part 1, the
 responsible Department official or his designee will so inform the recipient and the matter will be resolved by informal means whenever possible.
 If it has been determined that the matter cannot be resolved by informal means, action will be taken as provided for in § 1.8.
 (2) If an investigation does not warrant action pursuant to paragraph (d)(1) of this section the responsible Department official or his designee will
 so inform the recipient and the complainant, if any, in writing.
 (e) Intimidatory or retaliatory acts prohibited. No recipient or other person shall intimidate, threaten, coerce, or discriminate against any person
 for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by title VI of the Act or this part 1, or because he has made a complaint, testified,
 assisted, or participated in any manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this part. The identity of complainants shall be kept
 confidential except to the extent necessary to carry out the purposes of this part, including the conduct of any investigation, hearing, or judicial
 proceeding arising thereunder.

 § 1.8 Procedure for effecting compliance.
 (a) General. If there appears to be a failure or threatened failure to comply with this part 1, and if the noncompliance or threatened noncompliance
 cannot be corrected by informal means, compliance with this part 1 may be effected by the suspension or termination of or refusal to grant or to
 continue Federal financial assistance, or by any other means authorized by law. Such other means may include, but are not limited to: (1) A
 reference to the Department of Justice with a recommendation that appropriate proceedings be brought to enforce any rights of the United States
 under any law of the United States (including other titles of the Act), or any assurance or other contractual undertaking, and (2) any applicable
 proceeding under State or local law.
 (b) Noncompliance with § 1.5. If an applicant fails or refuses to furnish an assurance required under § 1.5 or otherwise fails or refuses to comply
 with the requirement imposed by or pursuant to that section, Federal financial assistance may be refused in accordance with the procedures of
 paragraph (c) of this section. The Department shall not be required to provide assistance in such a case during the pendency of the administrative
 proceedings under such paragraph, except that the Department shall continue assistance during the pendency of such proceedings where such
 assistance is due and payable pursuant to a contract therefor approved prior to January 3, 1965.
 (c) Termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance. No order suspending, terminating, or refusing to grant or


GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                                   Page 5
 continue Federal financial assistance shall become effective until (1) the responsible Department official has advised the applicant or recipient of
 his failure to comply and has determined that compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means, (2) there has been an express finding on the
 record, after opportunity for hearing, of a failure by the applicant or recipient to comply with a requirement imposed by or pursuant to this part 1,
 (3) the action has been approved by the Secretary, and (4) the expiration of 30 days after the Secretary has filed with the committees of the House
 and Senate having legislative jurisdiction over the program or activity involved a full written report of the circumstances and the grounds for such
 action. Any action to suspend or terminate or to refuse to grant or to continue Federal financial assistance shall be limited to the particular
 political entity, or part thereof, or other recipient as to whom such a finding has been made and shall be limited in its effect to the particular
 program, or part thereof, in which such noncompliance has been so found.
 (d) Other means authorized by law. No action to effect compliance by any other means authorized by law shall be taken until (1) the responsible
 Department official has determined that compliance cannot be secured by voluntary means, (2) the recipient or other person has been notified of
 its failure to comply and of the action to be taken to effect compliance, and (3) the expiration of at least 10 days from the mailing of such notice to
 the applicant or recipient. During this period of at least 10 days additional efforts shall be made to persuade the applicant or recipient to comply
 with this part 1 and to take such corrective action as may be appropriate.

 § 1.9 Hearings.
 (a) Opportunity for hearing. Whenever an opportunity for a hearing is required by § 1.8(c), reasonable notice shall be given by registered or
 certified mail, return receipt requested, to the affected applicant or recipient. This notice shall advise the applicant or recipient of the action
 proposed to be taken, the specific provision under which the proposed action against it is to be taken, and the matters of fact or law asserted as the
 basis for this action, and either:
 (1) Fix a date not less than 20 days after the date of such notice within which the applicant or recipient may request of the responsible Department
 official that the matter be scheduled for hearing, or (2) advise the applicant or recipient that the matter in question has been set down for hearing
 at a stated time and place. The time and place so fixed shall be reasonable and shall be subject to change for cause. The complainant, if any, shall
 be advised of the time and place of the hearing. An applicant or recipient may waive a hearing and submit written information and argument for
 the record. The failure of an applicant or recipient to request a hearing under this paragraph (a) or to appear at a hearing for which a date has been
 set shall be deemed to be a waiver of the right to a hearing under section 602 of the Act and § 1.8(c) and consent to the making of a decision on
 the basis of such information as is available.
 (b) Hearing procedures. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with 24 CFR part 180.
 [38 FR 17949, July 5, 1973, as amended at 61 FR 52217, Oct. 4, 1996]

 § 1.10 Effect on other regulations; forms and instructions.
 (a) Effect on other regulations. All regulations, orders, or like directions heretofore issued by any officer of the Department which impose
 requirements designed to prohibit any discrimination against persons on the ground of race, color, or national origin under any program or
 activity to which this part applies, and which authorize the suspension or termination of or refusal to grant or to continue Federal financial
 assistance to any applicant or recipient for failure to comply with such requirements, are hereby superseded to the extent that such discrimination
 is prohibited by this part, except that nothing in this part shall be deemed to relieve any person of any obligation assumed or imposed under any
 such superseded regulation, order, instruction, or like direction prior to January 3, 1965. Nothing in this part, however, shall be deemed to
 supersede any of the following (including future amendments thereof):
 (1) Executive Orders 11246 and 11375 and regulations issued thereunder, or
 (2) Executive Order 11063 and regulations issued thereunder, or any other order, regulations or instructions, insofar as such order, regulations, or
 instructions, prohibit discrimination on the ground of race, color, or national origin in any program or activity or situation to which this part is
 inapplicable, or prohibit discrimination on any other ground.
 (b) Forms and instructions. The responsible Department official shall assure that forms and detailed instructions and procedures for effectuating
 this part are issued and promptly made available to interested persons.
 (c) Supervision and coordination. The Secretary may from time to time assign to officials of the Department, or to officials of other departments
 or agencies of the Government with the consent of such department or agency, responsibilities in connection with the effectuation of the purposes
 of title VI of the Act and this part (other than responsibility for final decision as provided in § 1.10), including the achievement of effective
 coordination and maximum uniformity within the Department and within the Executive Branch of the Government in the application of title VI
 and this part to similar programs or activities and in similar situations. Any action taken, determination made, or requirement imposed by an
 official of another department or agency acting pursuant to an assignment of responsibility under this paragraph shall have the same effect as
 though such action had been taken by the responsible official of this Department.
 [38 FR 17949, July 5, 1973. Redesignated at 61 FR 52217, Oct. 4, 1996]




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 6
          Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Age in HUD
                           Programs
 Citation: 24 C.F.R. part 146

 Authority: Tier 1 — binding federal regulation; federal-assistance dependent

 Applicability / trigger: Conditional: applies to covered HUD programs or activities receiving federal financial assistance.

 Source: https://www.ecfr.gov/api/versioner/v1/full/2026-07-09/title-24.xml?part=146

 Currentness: Official eCFR versioned XML as of 2026-07-09; retrieved 2026-07-12.

 Retrieved: 2026-07-12



 This is a searchable rendering of an official source. It is not legal advice. The official source controls, and current law must be
 rechecked before action.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                             Page 1
 PART 146—NONDISCRIMINATION ON THE BASIS OF AGE IN HUD
 PROGRAMS OR ACTIVITIES RECEIVING FEDERAL FINANCIAL
 ASSISTANCE
 Authority: 42 U.S.C. 3535(d) and 6103.
 Source: 51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, unless otherwise noted.

 Subpart A—General
 § 146.1 Purpose of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975.
 The Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (the Act) prohibits discrimination on the basis of age in programs or activities receiving Federal financial
 assistance. The Act, however, permits federally assisted programs and activities and recipients of Federal funds to continue to use certain age
 distinctions and factors other than age which meet the requirements of the Act and this part.

 § 146.3 Purpose of HUD's age discrimination regulation.
 The purpose of this part is to state HUD's policies and procedures under the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, consistent with the
 government-wide age discrimination regulation contained at 45 CFR part 90.

 § 146.5 Applicability of part.
 This part applies to each program or activity that receives Federal financial assistance provided by HUD.

 § 146.7 Definitions.
 The terms HUD and Secretary are defined in 24 CFR part 5.
 Act means the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, 42 U.S.C. 6101-07.
 Action means any act, activity, policy, rule, standard, or method of administration or the use of any policy, rule, standard, or method of
 administration.
 Age means how old a person is, or the number of elapsed years from the date of a person's birth.
 Age distinction means any action using age or an age-related term.
 Age-related term means a word or words which necessarily imply a particular age or range of ages (for example, children, adult, older persons,
 but not student ).
 Federal financial assistance means any grant, entitlement, loan, cooperative agreement, contract (other than a procurement contract or a contract
 of insurance or guaranty), or any other arrangement by which HUD provides or otherwise makes available assistance in the form of:
 (a) Funds;
 (b) Service of Federal personnel; or
 (c) Real or personal property or any interest in or use of property, including:
 (1) Transfers or leases of property for less than fair market value or for reduced consideration; and
 (2) Proceeds from a subsequent transfer or lease of property if the Federal share of its fair market value is not returned to the Federal government.
 Recipient means any State or its political subdivisions; any instrumentality of a State or its political subdivisions; any public or private agency;
 any Indian tribe or Alaskan Native Village, institution, organization, or other entity; or any person to which Federal financial assistance is
 extended, directly or through another recipient. Recipient includes any successor, assignee, or transferee, but does not include the ultimate
 beneficiary of the assistance.
 Subrecipient means any of the entities in the definition of recipient to which a recipient extends or passes on Federal financial assistance. A
 subrecipient is regarded as a recipient of Federal financial assistance and has all the duties of a recipient set out in this part.
 United States means the several States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam, Wake Island, the
 Canal Zone, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, the Northern Marianas, and the territories and possessions of the United States.
 [51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 61 FR 5206, Feb. 9, 1996]




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                               Page 2
 Subpart B—Standards for Determining Age Discrimination
 § 146.11 Scope of subpart.
 This subpart contains the standards that HUD will use to determine whether an age distinction, or a factor other than age that may have a
 disproportionate effect on persons of different ages, is prohibited.

 § 146.13 Rules against age discrimination.
 (a) The rules stated in this paragraph are limited by the exceptions contained in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section.
 (1) General rule. No person in the United States shall, on the basis of age, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be
 subjected to discrimination under, any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
 (2) Specific rules. A recipient may not, in any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance, directly or through contracting,
 licensing, or other arrangements, use age distinctions or take any other actions that have the effect, on the basis of age, of:
 (i) Excluding individuals from, denying them the benefits of, or subjecting them to discrimination under, a program or activity receiving Federal
 financial assistance; or
 (ii) Denying or limiting individuals in their opportunity to participate in any program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance.
 (3) The specific forms of age discrimination listed in paragraph (a)(2) of this section do not necessarily constitute a complete list.
 (b) Exceptions for normal operation or statutory objective of any program or activity. A recipient is permitted to take an action otherwise
 prohibited by paragraph (a) of this section if the action reasonably takes into account age as a factor necessary to the normal operation or the
 achievement of any statutory objective of a program or activity. An action reasonably takes into account age as a factor necessary to the normal
 operation or the achievement of any statutory objective of a program or activity, if:
 (1) Age is used as a measure or approximation of one or more other characteristics; and
 (2) The other characteristics must be measured or approximated in order for the normal operation of the program or activity to continue, or to
 achieve any statutory objective of the program or activity; and
 (3) The other characteristics can be reasonably measured or approximated by the use of age; and
 (4) The other characteristics are impractical to measure directly on an individual basis.
 (c) Exceptions for reasonable factors other than age. A recipient is permitted to take action otherwise prohibited by paragraph (a) of this section if
 the action is based on a factor other than age, even though that action may have a disproportionate effect on persons of different ages. An action
 may be based on a factor other than age only if the factor bears a direct and substantial relationship to the normal operation of the program or
 activity or the achievement of a statutory objective.
 (d) Burden of proof. The burden of proving that an age distinction or other action falls within an exception described in paragraph (b) or (c) of
 this section is on the recipient of Federal financial assistance.
 (e) For the purposes of paragraphs (b) and (c), normal operation means the operation of a program or activity without significant changes that
 would impair its ability to meet its statutory objectives. Statutory objectives means any purpose of a program or activity expressly stated in any
 Federal, State, or local statute adopted by an elected, general purpose legislative body.
 (f) Notwithstanding paragraph (b) of this section, if a recipient operating a program provides special benefits to the elderly or to children, such
 use of age distinctions shall be presumed to be necessary to the normal operation of the program.

 Subpart C—Duties of HUD Recipients
 § 146.21 General responsibilities.
 Each recipient has primary responsibility to ensure that its programs and activities that receive Federal financial assistance from HUD comply
 with the provisions of the Act, the government-wide regulation, and this part, and shall take steps to eliminate violations of the Act. A recipient
 also has responsibility to maintain records, provide information, and to afford HUD access to its records to the extent HUD finds necessary to
 determine whether a program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from HUD is in compliance with the Act and this part.

 (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0030)
 [51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 7408, Mar. 11, 1987]

 § 146.23 Notice of subrecipients.
 Whenever a recipient passes Federal financial assistance from HUD to subrecipients, the recipient shall provide the subrecipient with written
 notice of its obligations under this part and the recipient will remain responsible for the subrecipient's compliance with respect to programs and
 activities receiving Federal financial assistance from HUD.


GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                                Page 3
 § 146.25 Assurance of compliance and recipient assessment of age distinctions.
 (a) Each recipient of Federal financial assistance from HUD shall sign a written assurance as specified by HUD that it will comply with the Act
 and this part with respect to programs and activities receiving Federal financial assistance from HUD.
 (b) As part of a compliance review under § 146.31 or an investigation under § 146.37, HUD may require a recipient employing the equivalent of
 15 or more employees to complete, in a manner specified by the Secretary or Secretary's designee, a written self-evaluation of any age distinction
 imposed in its program or activity receiving Federal financial assistance from HUD, so that HUD may have to assess the recipient's compliance
 with the Act. Whenever an assessment indicates a violation of the Act or this part, the recipient shall take corrective action to remedy the
 violation.

 (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0030)
 [51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 7408, Mar. 11, 1987]

 § 146.27 Information requirements.
 In order to make it possible for HUD to determine whether recipients are in compliance with the Act and this part, each recipient shall:
 (a) Keep records in a form and containing information that HUD determines is necessary;
 (b) Make information available to HUD upon request;
 (c) Permit reasonable access by HUD to the books, records, accounts and other recipient facilities and sources of information.

 (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0030)
 [51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 7408, Mar. 11, 1987]

 Subpart D—Investigation, Settlement, and Enforcement Procedures
 § 146.31 Compliance reviews.
 (a) HUD may conduct pre-award reviews to determine whether programs or activities submitted for HUD assistance are consistent with the age
 distinctions set forth at § 146.13(b).
 (b) If a pre-award review indicates that the proposed programs or activities are not consistent with the age distinctions set forth at § 146.13(b), the
 application will be returned to the applicant for additional information or clarification or for correction consistent with this part.
 (c) HUD may conduct compliance reviews of recipients that will enable it to investigate and correct violations of this part. HUD may conduct
 these reviews even in the absence of a complaint against a recipient. The review may be as comprehensive as necessary for HUD to determine
 whether a violation has occurred.
 (d) If a compliance review indicates a violation, HUD will attempt to achieve voluntary compliance. If voluntary compliance cannot be achieved,
 HUD may begin enforcement procedures as provided in § 146.39.

 § 146.33 Complaints.
 (a) Any person, individually or as a member of a class or on behalf of others, may file a complaint with HUD alleging discrimination prohibited
 by the Act. A complainant shall file a complaint within 180 days from the date the complainant first had knowledge of the alleged act of
 discrimination. However, for good cause, HUD may extend this time limit. The filing date for a complaint will be the date upon which the
 complaint is deemed sufficient to be processed.
 (b) HUD shall facilitate the filing of complaints and shall take the following measures:
 (1) Accept as a sufficient complaint any written legible statement which is signed by the complainant and which identifies the parties involved,
 the date the complainant first had knowledge of the alleged violation, and describes generally the alleged prohibited action or practice;
 (2) Freely permit a complainant to add information to the complaint to meet the requirements of a sufficient complaint;
 (3) Widely disseminate information regarding the obligations of recipients under the Act and this part;
 (4) Notify the complainant and the recipient of their rights under the complaint process, including the right to have a representative at all stages of
 the complaint process; and
 (5) Notify the complainant and the recipient of their right to contact HUD for information and assistance regarding the complaint resolution
 process.
 (c) HUD will return to the complainant any complaint determined to be outside the coverage of this part, and shall state the reasons why it is
 outside the coverage.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 4
 (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2529-0030)
 [51 FR 45266, Dec. 17, 1986, as amended at 52 FR 7408, Mar. 11, 1987]

 § 146.35 Mediation.
 (a) HUD shall refer to the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, a mediation agency designated by the Secretary of Health and Human
 Services, all complaints that:
 (1) Fall within the coverage of this part, unless the age distinction complained of is clearly with an exception; and
 (2) Contain all information necessary for further processing.
 (b) Both the complainant and the recipient shall participate in the mediation process to the extent necessary to reach an agreement or make an
 informal judgment that an agreement is not possible. There should be at least one meeting by each party with the mediator during the mediation
 process. However, the recipient and the complainant need not meet with the mediator at the same time.
 (c) If the complainant and the recipient reach an agreement, the mediator shall prepare a written statement of the agreement and have the
 complainant and recipient sign it. The mediator shall send a copy of the agreement to HUD. HUD will take no further action on the complaint
 unless the complainant or the recipient fails to comply with the agreement.
 (d) The mediator shall protect the confidentiality of information obtained in the course of the mediation process. No mediator shall testify in any
 adjudicative proceeding, produce any document, or otherwise disclose any information obtained in the course of the mediation process without
 the prior approval of the head of the mediation agency.
 (e) HUD shall use the mediation process for a maximum of 60 days after receiving a complaint. Mediation ends if:
 (1) 60 days elapse from the time HUD receives the complaint; or
 (2) Before the end of the 60-day period, an agreement is reached; or
 (3) Before the end of the 60-day period, the mediator determines that an agreement cannot be reached.
 This 60-day period may be extended by the mediator, with the concurrence of HUD, for not more than an additional 30 days if the mediator
 determines that it is likely that an agreement will be reached during such extended period.

 § 146.37 Investigation.
 (a) Investigation and settlement following mediation. (1) HUD shall investigate complaints that are unresolved after mediation or are reopened
 because of an alleged violation of a mediation agreement.
 (2) In the investigation of complaints filed under this part, HUD will establish facts through such methods as discussion with the complainant and
 recipient and the review of documents in the possession of either party. HUD may also seek the assistance of any applicable State agency. Where
 possible, HUD will settle the complaint on terms that are mutually agreeable to the parties.
 (3) Settlements shall be in writing and signed by the parties and by an authorized HUD official.
 (4) A settlement shall not affect the initiation or continuation of any other enforcement effort of HUD, including compliance reviews or
 investigation of other complaints involving the recipient.
 (5) A settlement reached under this paragraph (a) of this section is an agreement to resolve an alleged violation of the Act to the satisfaction of the
 parties involved, and does not constitute a finding of discrimination against the recipient.
 (b) Failure of settlement. If HUD cannot resolve the complaint through settlement, it may make a formal determination that the Act or this part
 has been violated and begin enforcement procedures, as provided in § 146.39. HUD shall inform the recipient and complainant in writing that the
 matter cannot be resolved through settlement.

 § 146.39 Enforcement procedures.
 (a) HUD may enforce the Act this regulation by:
 (1) Termination of a recipient's financial assistance from HUD under the program or activity involved, if the recipient has violated the Act or this
 part. The determination of the recipient's violation may be made only after a recipient has had an opportunity for a hearing on the record before an
 Administrative Law Judge. If the financial assistance consists of a Community Development Block Grant, the requirements of section 109(b) of
 the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5309, must also be satisfied before the termination of financial assistance.
 Cases settled in mediation or before hearing will not involve termination of a recipient's Federal financial assistance from HUD.
 (2) Any other means authorized by law, including, but not limited to:
 (i) Referral to the Department of Justice for proceedings to enforce any rights of the United States or obligations of the recipient created by the
 Act or this part;




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 5
 (ii) Use of any requirement of, or referral to, any Federal, State or local government agency that will have the effect of correcting a violation of
 the Act or this part.
 (b) Whenever the Secretary determines that a State or unit of general local government which is a recipient of Federal financial assistance under
 Title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5301-5317, has failed to comply with requirements of the Age
 Discrimination Act or this part with respect to a program or activity funded in whole or in part with such assistance, he or she shall notify the
 Governor of such State or the chief executive officer of such unit of general local government of the noncompliance and shall request the
 Governor or chief executive officer to secure compliance. If within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 60 days, the Governor or chief
 executive officer fails or refuses to secure compliance, the Secretary is authorized to take the action specified in (a) of this section, exercise the
 powers and functions provided for in section 111(a) of the Housing and Community Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5311(a), or take such other action as
 may be provided by law.
 (c) HUD shall limit any termination under § 146.35 to the particular recipient and particular program or activity HUD finds to be in violation of
 this part. HUD shall not base any part of a termination on a finding with respect to any program or activity of the recipient which does not receive
 Federal financial assistance from HUD.
 (d) HUD shall take no action under paragraph (a) of this section until:
 (1) The Secretary has advised the recipient of its failure to comply with the Act or this part and has determined that voluntary compliance cannot
 be achieved.
 (2) Thirty days have elapsed after the Secretary has submitted a written report of the circumstances and grounds of the action to the committees of
 the Congress having legislative jurisdiction over the Federal program or activity involved. A report shall be filed whenever any action is taken
 under paragraph (a) of this section.
 (e)(1) The Secretary may defer the provision of new Federal financial assistance to a recipient when termination proceedings under this section
 are initiated.
 (2) New financial assistance from HUD includes all assistance for which HUD requires an application, approval, or submissions under the
 Community Development Block Grant program including renewal or continuation of existing activities, or authorization of new activities, during
 the deferral period. New financial assistance from HUD does not include increases in funding as a result of changed computation for formula
 awards or assistance approved before the beginning of a hearing under this section.
 (3) HUD shall not impose a deferral until the recipient has received a notice of an opportunity for a hearing under this section. HUD shall not
 continue a deferral for more than 60 days unless a hearing has begun within that time or the time for beginning the hearing has been extended by
 mutual consent of the recipient and the Secretary. HUD shall not continue a deferral for more than 30 days after the close of the hearing, unless
 the hearing results in a finding that the recipient has violated that Act or this part.

 § 146.41 Prohibition against intimidation or retaliation.
 A recipient may not engage in acts of intimidation or retaliation against any person who:
 (a) Attempts to assert a right protected by this part; or
 (b) Cooperates in any mediation, investigation, hearing, or other part of HUD's investigation, settlement, and enforcement process.

 § 146.43 Hearings, decisions, post-termination proceedings.
 The provisions of 24 CFR part 180 apply to HUD enforcement of this part.
 [61 FR 52218, Oct. 4, 1996]

 § 146.45 Exhaustion of administrative remedies.
 (a) A complainant may file a civil action following the exhaustion of administrative remedies under the Act. Administrative remedies are
 exhausted if:
 (1) 180 days have elapsed since the complainant filed the complaint and HUD had made no finding with regard to the complaint; or
 (2) HUD issues any finding in favor of the recipient.
 (b) If HUD fails to make a finding within 180 days or issues a finding in favor of the recipient, HUD shall:
 (1) Promptly advise the complainant of this fact;
 (2) Advise the complainant of his or her right to bring a civil action for injunctive relief; and
 (3) Inform the complainant:
 (i) That he or she may bring a civil action only in a United States District Court for the district in which the recipient is located or transacts
 business;




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                                  Page 6
 (ii) That a complainant prevailing in a civil action has the right to be awarded the costs of the action, including reasonable attorney's fees, but that
 the complainant must demand these costs in the complaint;
 (iii) That before commencing the action, the complainant must give 30 days' notice by registered mail to the Secretary of HUD, the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services, the Attorney General of the United States, and the recipient;
 (iv) That the notice must state: the alleged violation of the Act, the relief requested, the court in which the complainant is bringing the action, and
 whether or not attorney's fees are demanded in the event the complainant prevails; and
 (v) That the complainant may not bring an action if the same alleged violation of the Act by the same recipient is the subject of a pending action
 in any court of the United States.

 § 146.47 Remedial and affirmative action by recipients.
 (a) Where the Secretary finds that a recipient has unlawfully discriminated on the basis of age, the recipient shall take any action that the
 Secretary may require to overcome the effects of the discrimination. If another recipient exercises control over a subrecipient that has unlawfully
 discriminated, the Secretary may require both recipients to take remedial action.
 (b) Even in the absence of a finding of discrimination, a recipient may take affirmative action to overcome the effects of conditions that resulted
 in limited participation in the recipient's program or activity on the basis of age.
 (c) If a recipient operating a program which serves the elderly or children in addition to persons of other ages provides special benefits to the
 elderly or children, the provision of those benefits shall be presumed to be voluntary affirmative action, provided that it does not have the effect
 of excluding otherwise eligible persons from participation in the program.

 § 146.49 Alternate funds disbursal procedure.
 (a) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph and to the extent authorized by law, the Secretary may redisburse funds withheld or terminated
 under this part directly to an alternate recipient, including any public or non-profit private organization or agency, State or political subdivision of
 the State. Under title I of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5301, funds withheld because of a reduction or
 withdrawal of a recipient's Community Development Block Grant must be reallocated in the succeeding fiscal year, in accordance with the
 applicable regulations governing that program.
 (b) The Secretary shall require the alternate recipient to demonstrate:
 (1) The ability to comply with the regulations; and
 (2) The ability to achieve the goals of the Federal statute authorizing the program or activity.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                               Page 7
   Tenant-Based Rental Assistance Lead-Safe Housing
                         Rule
 Citation: 24 C.F.R. part 35, subpart M

 Authority: Tier 1 — binding federal regulation; covered assistance dependent

 Applicability / trigger: Conditional: applies to covered tenant-based rental assistance in pre-1978 housing, subject to the
 subpart's exemptions and thresholds.

 Source: https://www.ecfr.gov/api/versioner/v1/full/2026-07-09/title-24.xml?part=35 (render limited to subpart M)

 Currentness: Official eCFR versioned XML as of 2026-07-09; retrieved 2026-07-12.

 Retrieved: 2026-07-12



 This is a searchable rendering of an official source. It is not legal advice. The official source controls, and current law must be
 rechecked before action.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                             Page 1
 Subpart M—Tenant-Based Rental Assistance
 Source: 64 FR 50216, Sept. 15, 1999, unless otherwise noted.

 § 35.1200 Purpose and applicability.
 (a) Purpose. The purpose of this subpart M is to establish procedures to eliminate as far as practicable lead-based paint hazards in housing
 occupied by families receiving tenant-based rental assistance. Such assistance includes tenant-based rental assistance under the Section 8
 certificate program, the Section 8 voucher program, the HOME program, the Shelter Plus Care program, the Housing Opportunities for Persons
 With AIDS (HOPWA) program, and the Indian Housing Block Grant program. Tenant-based rental assistance means rental assistance that is not
 attached to the structure.
 (b) Applicability. (1) This subpart applies only to dwelling units occupied or to be occupied by families or households that have one or more
 children of less than 6 years of age, common areas servicing such dwelling units, and exterior painted surfaces associated with such dwelling
 units or common areas. Common areas servicing a dwelling unit include those areas through which residents pass to gain access to the unit and
 other areas frequented by resident children of less than 6 years of age, including on-site play areas and child care facilities.
 (2) For the purposes of the Section 8 tenant-based certificate program and the Section 8 voucher program:
 (i) The requirements of this subpart are applicable where an initial or periodic inspection occurs on or after September 15, 2000; and
 (ii) The PHA shall be the designated party.
 (3) For the purposes of formula grants awarded under the Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS Program (HOPWA) (42 U.S.C. 12901 et
 seq. ):
 (i) The requirements of this subpart shall apply to activities for which program funds are first obligated on or after September 15, 2000; and
 (ii) The grantee shall be the designated party.
 (4) For the purposes of competitively awarded grants under the HOPWA Program and the Shelter Plus Care program (42 U.S.C. 11402-11407)
 tenant-based rental assistance component:
 (i) The requirements of this subpart shall apply to grants awarded pursuant to Notices of Funding Availability published on or after September 15,
 2000; and
 (ii) The grantee shall be the designated party.
 (5) For the purposes of the HOME program:
 (i) The requirements of this subpart shall not apply to funds which are committed in accordance with § 92.2 of this title before September 15,
 2000; and
 (ii) The participating jurisdiction shall be the designated party.
 (6) For the purposes of the Indian Housing Block Grant program:
 (i) The requirements of this subpart shall apply to activities for which funds are first obligated on or after September 15, 2000; and
 (ii) The IHBG recipient shall be the designated party.
 (7) The housing agency, grantee, participating jurisdiction, or IHBG recipient may assign to a subrecipient or other entity the responsibilities of
 the designated party in this subpart.
 [64 FR 50216, Sept. 15, 1999; 65 FR 3387, Jan. 21, 2000]

 § 35.1205 Definitions and other general requirements.
 Definitions and other general requirements that apply to this subpart are found in subpart B of this part.

 § 35.1210 Notices and pamphlet.
 (a) Notice. In cases where evaluation or paint stabilization is undertaken, the owner shall provide a notice to residents in accordance with §
 35.125. A visual assessment alone is not considered an evaluation for purposes of this part.
 (b) Lead hazard information pamphlet. The owner shall provide the lead hazard information pamphlet in accordance with § 35.130.
 [64 FR 50216, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34273, June 21, 2004]




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 2
 § 35.1215 Activities at initial and periodic inspection.
 (a) (1) During the initial and periodic inspections, an inspector acting on behalf of the designated party and trained in visual assessment for
 deteriorated paint surfaces in accordance with procedures established by HUD shall conduct a visual assessment of all painted surfaces in order to
 identify any deteriorated paint.
 (2) For tenant-based rental assistance provided under the HOME program, visual assessment shall be conducted as part of the initial and periodic
 inspections required under § 92.209(i) of this title.
 (b) The owner shall stabilize each deteriorated paint surface in accordance with § 35.1330(a) and (b) before commencement of assisted
 occupancy. If assisted occupancy has commenced prior to a periodic inspection, such paint stabilization must be completed within 30 days of
 notification of the owner of the results of the visual assessment. Paint stabilization is considered complete when clearance is achieved in
 accordance with § 35.1340. If the owner does not complete the hazard reduction required by this section, the dwelling unit is in violation of
 Housing Quality Standards (HQS) until the hazard reduction is completed or the unit is no longer covered by this subpart because the unit is no
 longer under a housing assistance payment (HAP) contract with the housing agency. For the unit subsequently to come under a HAP contract
 with the housing agency for occupancy by a family with a child under age 6, paint stabilization must be completed, including clearance being
 achieved in accordance with § 35.1340.
 (c) The owner shall provide a notice to occupants in accordance with § 35.125(b)(1) and (c) describing the results of the clearance examination.
 (d) The designated party may grant the owner an extension of time to complete paint stabilization and clearance for reasonable cause, but such an
 extension shall not extend beyond 90 days after the date of notification to the owner of the results of the visual assessment.
 [64 FR 50216, Sept. 15, 1999, as amended at 69 FR 34273, June 21, 2004; 82 FR 4170, Jan. 13, 2017]

 § 35.1220 Ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities.
 Notwithstanding the designation of the PHA, grantee, participating jurisdiction, or Indian Housing Block Grant (IHBG) recipient as the
 designated party for this subpart, the owner shall incorporate ongoing lead-based paint maintenance activities into regular building operations in
 accordance with § 35.1355(a).
 [69 FR 34273, June 21, 2004]

 § 35.1225 Child with an elevated blood lead level.
 (a) Within 15 calendar days after being notified by a public health department or other medical health care provider that a child of less than 6
 years of age living in a dwelling unit to which this subpart applies has been identified as having an elevated blood lead level, the designated party
 shall complete an environmental investigation of the dwelling unit in which the child lived at the time the blood was last sampled and of common
 areas servicing the dwelling unit. When the environmental investigation is complete, the designated party shall immediately provide the report of
 the environmental investigation to the owner of the dwelling unit. If the child identified as having an elevated blood lead level is no longer living
 in the unit when the designated party receives notification from the public health department or other medical health care provider, but another
 household receiving tenant-based rental assistance is living in the unit or is planning to live there, the requirements of this section apply just as
 they do if the child still lives in the unit. If a public health department has already conducted an evaluation of the dwelling unit in regard to the
 child's elevated blood lead level case, or the designated party conducted an environmental investigation of the unit and common areas servicing
 the unit between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date when the designated party received the notification of the elevated blood
 lead level, the requirements of this paragraph shall not apply. If the designated party or the owner conducted a risk assessment of the unit and
 common areas servicing the unit during that period, the designated party need not conduct another risk assessment there but shall conduct the
 elements of an environmental investigation not already conducted during the risk assessment.
 (b) Verification. After receiving information from a person who is not a medical health care provider that a child of less than 6 years of age living
 in a dwelling unit covered by this subpart may have an elevated blood lead level, the designated party shall immediately verify the information
 with the public health department or other medical health care provider. If the public health department or provider denies the request, such as
 because it does not have the capacity to verify that information, the designated party shall send documentation of the denial to the HUD rental
 assistance program manager, who shall make an effort to verify the information. If that department or provider verifies that the child has an
 elevated blood lead level, such verification shall constitute notification, and the designated party shall take the action required in paragraphs (a)
 and (c) of this section.
 (c) Lead-based paint hazard reduction. Within 30 calendar days after receiving the report of the environmental investigation from the designated
 party or the evaluation from the public health department, the owner shall complete the reduction of identified lead-based paint hazards in
 accordance with § 35.1325 or § 35.1330. Lead-based paint hazard reduction is considered complete when clearance is achieved in accordance
 with § 35.1340 and the clearance report states that all lead-based paint hazards identified in the environmental investigation have been treated
 with interim controls or abatement or the public health department certifies that the lead-based paint hazard reduction is complete. The
 requirements of this paragraph do not apply if the designated party or the owner, between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date
 the designated party received the notification of the elevated blood lead level, already conducted an environmental investigation of the unit and
 common areas servicing the unit and the owner completed reduction of identified lead-based paint hazards. If the owner does not complete the
 lead-based paint hazard reduction required by this section, the dwelling unit is in violation of the standards of 24 CFR 982.401.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                            Page 3
 (d) Notice of lead-based paint hazard evaluation and reduction. The owner shall notify building residents of any lead-based paint hazard
 evaluation or reduction activities in accordance with § 35.125.
 (e) Reporting requirement. (1) The owner shall report the name and address of a child identified as having an elevated blood lead level to the
 public health department within 5 business days of being so notified by any other medical health care professional.
 (2) The owner shall also report each confirmed case of a child with an elevated blood lead level to the HUD field office and the HUD Office of
 Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes within 5 business days of being so notified.
 (3) The owner shall provide to the HUD field office documentation that it has conducted the activities of paragraphs (a) through (d) of this
 section, within 10 business days of the deadline for each activity.
 (f) Other assisted dwelling units in the property. (1) If the environmental investigation conducted pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section
 identifies lead-based paint hazards, the designated party or the owner shall, for other assisted dwelling units covered by this part in which a child
 under age 6 resides or is expected to reside on the date lead-based paint hazard reduction under paragraph (c) of this section is complete, and the
 common areas servicing those units, conduct a risk assessment in accordance with § 35.1320(b) within 30 calendar days after receipt of the
 environmental investigation report if there are 20 or fewer such units, or 60 calendar days if there are more such units.
 (2) If the risk assessment conducted under paragraph (f)(1) of this section identifies lead-based paint hazards, the owner shall complete the
 reduction of the lead-based paint hazards in accordance with § 35.1325 or § 35.1330 within 30 calendar days, or within 90 calendar days if more
 than 20 units have lead-based paint hazards such that the control work would disturb painted surfaces that total more than the de minimis
 threshold of § 35.1350(d). Lead-based paint hazard reduction is considered complete when clearance is achieved in accordance with § 35.1340
 and the clearance report states that all lead-based paint hazards identified in the risk assessment have been treated with interim controls or
 abatement.
 (3) The requirements of this paragraph (f) of this section do not apply if:
 (i) The designated party or the owner, between the date the child's blood was last sampled and the date the owner received the notification of the
 elevated blood lead level, both conducted a risk assessment of the other assisted dwelling units covered by paragraph (f)(1) of this section and the
 common areas servicing those units, and the owner conducted interim controls of identified lead-based paint hazards in accordance with §
 35.1225(c); or
 (ii) The owner has documentation of compliance with evaluation, notification, lead disclosure, ongoing lead-based paint maintenance, and
 lead-based paint management requirements under this part throughout the 12 months preceding the date the owner received the environmental
 investigation report pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section; and,
 (iii) In either case, the owner provided the HUD field office, within 10 business days after receiving the notification of the elevated blood lead
 level, documentation that it has conducted the activities described in this paragraph (f)(3).
 (g) Data collection and record keeping responsibilities. At least quarterly, the designated party shall attempt to obtain from the public health
 department(s) with area(s) of jurisdiction similar to that of the designated party the names and/or addresses of children of less than 6 years of age
 with an identified elevated blood lead level. At least quarterly, the designated party shall also report an updated list of the addresses of units
 receiving assistance under a tenant-based rental assistance program to the same public health department(s), except that the report(s) to the public
 health department(s) is not required if the health department states that it does not wish to receive such report. If it obtains names and addresses of
 elevated blood lead level children from the public health department(s), the designated party shall match information on cases of elevated blood
 lead levels with the names and addresses of families receiving tenant-based rental assistance, unless the public health department performs such a
 matching procedure.
 If a match occurs, the designated party shall carry out the requirements of this section.
 [82 FR 4171, Jan. 13, 2017]




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 4
Page 337                  TITLE 34—CRIME CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT                                                 § 12291

  (2) Federal share                                                  (2) Selection of communities
    The Federal share of funding of a program                          Communities identified for such GREAT
  funded with a grant under paragraph (1) shall                      projects shall be selected by the Attorney
  not exceed 50 percent.                                             General on the basis of gang-related activity
  (3) Authorization of appropriations                                in that particular community.
    There are authorized to be appropriated to                       (3) Amount of assistance per project; allocation
  carry out this section—                                              The Attorney General shall make available
       (A) $700,000 for fiscal year 1996;                            not less than $800,000 per project, subject to
       (B) $1,000,000 for fiscal year 1997;                          the availability of appropriations, and such
       (C) $1,000,000 for fiscal year 1998;                          funds shall be allocated—
       (D) $1,100,000 for fiscal year 1999; and                          (A) 50 percent to the affected State and
       (E) $1,200,000 for fiscal year 2000.                            local law enforcement and prevention orga-
(d) Definitions                                                        nizations participating in such projects; and
                                                                         (B) 50 percent to the Bureau of Alcohol,
  In this section—                                                     Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives, Depart-
    ‘‘Indian tribe’’ means a tribe, band, pueblo,                      ment of Justice for salaries, expenses, and
  nation, or other organized group or commu-                           associated administrative costs for oper-
  nity of Indians, including an Alaska Native                          ating and overseeing such projects.
  village (as defined in or established under the
  Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43                          (b) Authorization of appropriations
  U.S.C. 1601 et seq.),1 that is recognized as eligi-                There is authorized to be appropriated to
  ble for the special programs and services pro-                   carry out this section—
  vided by the United States to Indians because                        (1) $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2006;
  of their status as Indians.                                          (2) $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2007;
    ‘‘State’’ means a State, the District of Co-                       (3) $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2008;
  lumbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,                             (4) $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2009; and
  the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana                             (5) $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2010.
  Islands, American Samoa, Guam, and the
                                                                   (Pub. L. 103–322, title III, § 32401, Sept. 13, 1994,
  United States Virgin Islands.
                                                                   108 Stat. 1902; Pub. L. 107–296, title XI, § 1112(p),
(Pub. L. 103–322, title III, § 32201, Sept. 13, 1994,              Nov. 25, 2002, 116 Stat. 2278; Pub. L. 109–162, title
108 Stat. 1901.)                                                   XI, § 1188, Jan. 5, 2006, 119 Stat. 3128.)

                      Editorial Notes                                                   Editorial Notes
                   REFERENCES IN TEXT                                                    CODIFICATION
  The Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, referred                  Section was formerly classified to section 13921 of
to in subsec. (d), is Pub. L. 92–203, Dec. 18, 1971, 85 Stat.      Title 42, The Public Health and Welfare, prior to edi-
688, which is classified generally to chapter 33 (§ 1601 et        torial reclassification and renumbering as this section.
seq.) of Title 43, Public Lands. For complete classifica-
tion of this Act to the Code, see Short Title note set                                   AMENDMENTS
out under section 1601 of Title 43 and Tables.                       2006—Subsec. (b). Pub. L. 109–162, which directed the
                       CODIFICATION                                amendment of section 32401(b) of the Violent Crime
                                                                   Control Act of 1994 by adding pars. (1) to (5) and strik-
  Section was formerly classified to section 13911 of              ing out former pars. (1) to (6), was executed by making
Title 42, The Public Health and Welfare, prior to edi-             the amendments to this section, which is section
torial reclassification and renumbering as this section.           32401(b) of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforce-
                                                                   ment Act of 1994, to reflect the probable intent of Con-
       Statutory Notes and Related Subsidiaries                    gress. Former pars. (1) to (6) authorized appropriations
                                                                   for fiscal years 1995 through 2000.
    ABOLITION OF IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION                      2002—Subsec. (a). Pub. L. 107–296, § 1112(p)(1), sub-
        SERVICE AND TRANSFER OF FUNCTIONS                          stituted ‘‘Attorney General’’ for ‘‘Secretary of the
   For abolition of Immigration and Naturalization                 Treasury’’ wherever appearing.
Service, transfer of functions, and treatment of related             Subsec. (a)(3)(B). Pub. L. 107–296, § 1112(p)(2), sub-
references, see note set out under section 1551 of Title           stituted ‘‘Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
8, Aliens and Nationality.                                         Explosives, Department of Justice’’ for ‘‘Bureau of Al-
                                                                   cohol, Tobacco and Firearms’’.
   PART I—GANG RESISTANCE EDUCATION AND
                TRAINING                                                  Statutory Notes and Related Subsidiaries

§ 12281. Gang Resistance Education and Training                             EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2002 AMENDMENT
    projects                                                         Amendment by Pub. L. 107–296 effective 60 days after
                                                                   Nov. 25, 2002, see section 4 of Pub. L. 107–296, set out as
(a) Establishment of projects                                      an Effective Date note under section 101 of Title 6, Do-
  (1) In general                                                   mestic Security.
    The Attorney General shall establish not                          SUBCHAPTER III—VIOLENCE AGAINST
  less than 50 Gang Resistance Education and                                      WOMEN
  Training (GREAT) projects, to be located in
  communities across the country, in addition                      § 12291. Definitions and grant provisions
  to the number of projects currently funded.
                                                                   (a) Definitions
 1 So in original. A closing parenthesis probably should precede     In this subchapter, for the purpose of grants
the comma.                                                         authorized under this subchapter:
§ 12291             TITLE 34—CRIME CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT                                            Page 338

 (1) Abuse in later life                                   (B) court security personnel;
   The term ‘‘abuse in later life’’—                       (C) personnel working in related supple-
     (A) means—                                          mentary offices or programs (such as child
       (i) neglect, abandonment, economic                support enforcement); and
     abuse, or willful harm of an adult aged 50            (D) any other court-based or community-
     or older by an individual in an ongoing re-         based personnel having responsibilities or
     lationship of trust with the victim; or             authority to address domestic violence, dat-
       (ii) domestic violence, dating violence,          ing violence, sexual assault, or stalking in
     sexual assault, or stalking of an adult aged        the court system.
     50 or older by any individual; and                (7) Courts
      (B) does not include self-neglect.                 The term ‘‘courts’’ means any civil or crimi-
 (2) Alaska Native village                             nal, tribal, and Alaska Native Village, Fed-
    The term ‘‘Alaska Native village’’ has the         eral, State, local or territorial court having
 same meaning given such term in the Alaska            jurisdiction to address domestic violence, dat-
 Native Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. 1601          ing violence, sexual assault or stalking, in-
 et seq.).                                             cluding immigration, family, juvenile, and de-
                                                       pendency courts, and the judicial officers serv-
 (3) Child abuse and neglect
                                                       ing in those courts, including judges, mag-
    The term ‘‘child abuse and neglect’’ means         istrate judges, commissioners, justices of the
 any recent act or failure to act on the part of       peace, or any other person with decision-
 a parent or caregiver with intent to cause            making authority.
 death, serious physical or emotional harm,            (8) Culturally specific
 sexual abuse, or exploitation, or an act or fail-
 ure to act which presents an imminent risk of           The term ‘‘culturally specific’’ means pri-
 serious harm to an unemancipated minor. This          marily directed toward racial and ethnic mi-
 definition shall not be construed to mean that        nority groups (as defined in section 1707(g) of
 failure to leave an abusive relationship, in the      the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C.
 absence of other action constituting abuse or         300u–6(g)).1
 neglect, is itself abuse or neglect.                  (9) Culturally specific services
 (4) Child maltreatment                                  The term ‘‘culturally specific services’’
    The term ‘‘child maltreatment’’ means the          means community-based services that include
 physical or psychological abuse or neglect of a       culturally relevant and linguistically specific
 child or youth, including sexual assault and          services and resources to culturally specific
 abuse.                                                communities.
 (5) Community-based organization                      (10) Dating partner
    The term ‘‘community-based organization’’            The term ‘‘dating partner’’ refers to a person
 means a nonprofit, nongovernmental, or tribal         who is or has been in a social relationship of
 organization that serves a specific geographic        a romantic or intimate nature with the
 community that—                                       abuser, and where the existence of such a rela-
      (A) focuses primarily on domestic vio-           tionship shall be determined based on a con-
    lence, dating violence, sexual assault, or         sideration of—
    stalking;                                              (A) the length of the relationship;
      (B) has established a specialized culturally         (B) the type of relationship; and
    specific program that addresses domestic vi-           (C) the frequency of interaction between
    olence, dating violence, sexual assault, or          the persons involved in the relationship.
    stalking;                                          (11) Dating violence
      (C) has a primary focus on underserved
    populations (and includes representatives of         The term ‘‘dating violence’’ means violence
    these populations) and domestic violence,          committed by a person—
    dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking;          (A) who is or has been in a social relation-
    or                                                   ship of a romantic or intimate nature with
      (D) obtains expertise, or shows dem-               the victim; and
    onstrated capacity to work effectively, on             (B) where the existence of such a relation-
    domestic violence, dating violence, sexual           ship shall be determined based on a consider-
    assault, and stalking through collaboration.         ation of the following factors:
 (6) Court-based personnel; court-related per-               (i) The length of the relationship.
      sonnel                                                 (ii) The type of relationship.
                                                             (iii) The frequency of interaction be-
    The terms ‘‘court-based personnel’’ and                tween the persons involved in the relation-
 ‘‘court-related personnel’’ mean individuals              ship.
 working in the court, whether paid or volun-
 teer, including—                                      (12) Domestic violence
      (A) clerks, special masters, domestic rela-        The term ‘‘domestic violence’’ includes fel-
    tions officers, administrators, mediators,         ony or misdemeanor crimes committed by a
    custody evaluators, guardians ad litem, law-       current or former spouse or intimate partner
    yers, negotiators, probation, parole, inter-       of the victim under the family or domestic vi-
    preters, victim assistants, victim advocates,      olence laws of the jurisdiction receiving grant
    and judicial, administrative, or any other
    professionals or personnel similarly involved      1 So in original. The period probably should be preceded by an-

    in the legal process;                            other closing parenthesis.
Page 339            TITLE 34—CRIME CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT                                § 12291

 funding and, in the case of victim services, in-   (18) Indian
 cludes the use or attempted use of physical          The term ‘‘Indian’’ means a member of an
 abuse or sexual abuse, or a pattern of any         Indian tribe.
 other coercive behavior committed, enabled,
 or solicited to gain or maintain power and         (19) Indian country
 control over a victim, including verbal, psy-        The term ‘‘Indian country’’ has the same
 chological, economic, or technological abuse       meaning given such term in section 1151 of
 that may or may not constitute criminal be-        title 18.
 havior, by a person who—                           (20) Indian housing
     (A) is a current or former spouse or inti-
   mate partner of the victim, or person simi-        The term ‘‘Indian housing’’ means housing
   larly situated to a spouse of the victim;        assistance described in the Native American
     (B) is cohabitating, or has cohabitated,       Housing Assistance and Self-Determination
   with the victim as a spouse or intimate part-    Act of 1996 (25 U.S.C. 4101 et seq., as amended).
   ner;                                             (21) Indian law enforcement
     (C) shares a child in common with the vic-
   tim; or                                            The term ‘‘Indian law enforcement’’ means
     (D) commits acts against a youth or adult      the departments or individuals under the di-
   victim who is protected from those acts          rection of the Indian tribe that maintain pub-
   under the family or domestic violence laws       lic order.
   of the jurisdiction.                             (22) Indian tribe; Indian Tribe
 (13) Economic abuse                                  The terms ‘‘Indian tribe’’ and ‘‘Indian Tribe’’
   The term ‘‘economic abuse’’, in the context      mean a tribe, band, pueblo, nation, or other
 of domestic violence, dating violence, and         organized group or community of Indians, in-
 abuse in later life, means behavior that is co-    cluding any Alaska Native village or regional
 ercive, deceptive, or unreasonably controls or     or village corporation (as defined in, or estab-
 restrains a person’s ability to acquire, use, or   lished pursuant to, the Alaska Native Claims
 maintain economic resources to which they          Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.)), that is
 are entitled, including using coercion, fraud,     recognized as eligible for the special programs
 or manipulation to—                                and services provided by the United States to
     (A) restrict a person’s access to money, as-   Indians because of their status as Indians.
   sets, credit, or financial information;
     (B) unfairly use a person’s personal eco-      (23) Law enforcement
   nomic resources, including money, assets,          The term ‘‘law enforcement’’ means a public
   and credit, for one’s own advantage; or          agency charged with policing functions, in-
     (C) exert undue influence over a person’s      cluding any of its component bureaus (such as
   financial and economic behavior or deci-         governmental victim services programs or Vil-
   sions, including forcing default on joint or     lage Public Safety Officers), including those
   other financial obligations, exploiting pow-     referred to in section 2802 of title 25.
   ers of attorney, guardianship, or con-           (24) Legal assistance
   servatorship, or failing or neglecting to act
   in the best interests of a person to whom one      (A) Definition
   has a fiduciary duty.                                The term ‘‘legal assistance’’ means assist-
 (14) Elder abuse                                     ance provided by or under the direct super-
   The term ‘‘elder abuse’’ means any action          vision of a person described in subparagraph
 against a person who is 50 years of age or older     (B) to an adult, youth, or child victim of do-
 that constitutes the willful—                        mestic violence, dating violence, sexual as-
     (A) infliction of injury, unreasonable con-      sault, or stalking relating to a matter de-
   finement, intimidation, or cruel punishment        scribed in subparagraph (C).
   with resulting physical harm, pain, or men-        (B) Person described
   tal anguish; or                                      A person described in this subparagraph
     (B) deprivation by a person, including a
                                                      is—
   caregiver, of goods or services with intent to
                                                          (i) a licensed attorney;
   cause physical harm, mental anguish, or
                                                          (ii) in immigration proceedings, a Board
   mental illness.
                                                        of Immigration Appeals accredited rep-
 (15) Female genital mutilation or cutting              resentative;
   The term ‘‘female genital mutilation or cut-           (iii) in claims of the Department of Vet-
 ting’’ has the meaning given such term in sec-         erans Affairs, a representative authorized
 tion 116 of title 18.                                  by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs; or
 (16) Forced marriage                                     (iv) any person who functions as an at-
   The term ‘‘forced marriage’’ means a mar-            torney or lay advocate in tribal court.
 riage to which 1 or both parties do not or can-      (C) Matter described
 not consent, and in which 1 or more elements           A matter described in this subparagraph is
 of force, fraud, or coercion is present. Forced      a matter relating to—
 marriage can be both a cause and a con-                  (i) divorce, parental rights, child sup-
 sequence of domestic violence, dating vio-             port, Tribal, territorial, immigration, em-
 lence, sexual assault or stalking.                     ployment, administrative agency, housing,
 (17) Homeless                                          campus, education, healthcare, privacy,
   The term ‘‘homeless’’ has the meaning given          contract, consumer, civil rights, protec-
 such term in section 12473 of this title.              tion or other injunctive proceedings, re-
§ 12291             TITLE 34—CRIME CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT                               Page 340

     lated enforcement proceedings, and other        (29) Protection order or restraining order
     similar matters;                                  The term ‘‘protection order’’ or ‘‘restraining
       (ii) criminal justice investigations, pros-   order’’ includes—
     ecutions, and post-conviction matters (in-          (A) any injunction, restraining order, or
     cluding sentencing, parole, and probation)        any other order issued by a civil or criminal
     that impact the victim’s safety, privacy,         court for the purpose of preventing violent
     or other interests as a victim;                   or threatening acts or harassment against,
       (iii) alternative dispute resolution, re-       sexual violence or contact or communica-
     storative practices, or other processes in-       tion with or physical proximity to, another
     tended to promote victim safety, privacy,         person, including any temporary or final or-
     and autonomy, and offender account-               ders issued by civil or criminal courts
     ability, regardless of court involvement; or      whether obtained by filing an independent
       (iv) with respect to a conviction of a vic-     action or as a pendente lite order in another
     tim relating to or arising from domestic          proceeding so long as any civil order was
     violence, dating violence, sexual assault,        issued in response to a complaint, petition,
     stalking, or sex trafficking victimization        or motion filed by or on behalf of a person
     of the victim, post-conviction relief pro-        seeking protection; and
     ceedings in State, local, Tribal, or terri-         (B) any support, child custody or visita-
     torial court.                                     tion provisions, orders, remedies, or relief
   (D) Intake or referral                              issued as part of a protection order, restrain-
     For purposes of this paragraph, intake or         ing order, or stay away injunction pursuant
   referral, by itself, does not constitute legal      to State, tribal, territorial, or local law au-
   assistance.                                         thorizing the issuance of protection orders,
 (25) Personally identifying information or per-       restraining orders, or injunctions for the
     sonal information                                 protection of victims of domestic violence,
                                                       dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking.
   The term ‘‘personally identifying informa-
 tion’’ or ‘‘personal information’’ means indi-      (30) Rape crisis center
 vidually identifying information for or about         The term ‘‘rape crisis center’’ means a non-
 an individual including information likely to       profit, nongovernmental, or tribal organiza-
 disclose the location of a victim of domestic       tion, or governmental entity in a State other
 violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or       than a Territory that provides intervention
 stalking, regardless of whether the informa-        and related assistance, as specified in section
 tion is encoded, encrypted, hashed, or other-       12511(b)(2)(C) of this title, to victims of sexual
 wise protected, including—                          assault without regard to their age. In the
     (A) a first and last name;                      case of a governmental entity, the entity may
     (B) a home or other physical address;           not be part of the criminal justice system
     (C) contact information (including a post-      (such as a law enforcement agency) and must
   al, e-mail or Internet protocol address, or       be able to offer a comparable level of confiden-
   telephone or facsimile number);                   tiality as a nonprofit entity that provides
     (D) a social security number, driver license    similar victim services.
   number, passport number, or student identi-       (31) Restorative practice
   fication number; and
     (E) any other information, including date         The term ‘‘restorative practice’’ means a
   of birth, racial or ethnic background, or reli-   practice relating to a specific harm that—
   gious affiliation, that would serve to iden-          (A) is community-based and unaffiliated
   tify any individual.                                with any civil or criminal legal process;
                                                         (B) is initiated by a victim of the harm;
 (26) Population specific organization                   (C) involves, on a voluntary basis and
   The term ‘‘population specific organization’’       without any evidence of coercion or intimi-
 means a nonprofit, nongovernmental organiza-          dation of any victim of the harm by any in-
 tion that primarily serves members of a spe-          dividual who committed the harm or anyone
 cific underserved population and has dem-             associated with any such individual—
 onstrated experience and expertise providing              (i) 1 or more individuals who committed
 targeted services to members of that specific           the harm;
 underserved population.                                   (ii) 1 or more victims of the harm; and
 (27) Population specific services                         (iii) the community affected by the harm
                                                         through 1 or more representatives of the
   The term ‘‘population specific services’’             community;
 means victim-centered services that address
 the safety, health, economic, legal, housing,           (D) shall include and has the goal of—
 workplace, immigration, confidentiality, or               (i) collectively seeking accountability
 other needs of victims of domestic violence,            from 1 or more individuals who committed
 dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking,           the harm;
 and that are designed primarily for and are               (ii) developing a written process whereby
 targeted to a specific underserved population.          1 or more individuals who committed the
                                                         harm will take responsibility for the ac-
 (28) Prosecution                                        tions that caused harm to 1 or more vic-
   The term ‘‘prosecution’’ means any public             tims of the harm; and
 agency charged with direct responsibility for             (iii) developing a written course of ac-
 prosecuting criminal offenders, including such          tion plan—
 agency’s component bureaus (such as govern-                  (I) that is responsive to the needs of 1
 mental victim assistance programs).                       or more victims of the harm; and
Page 341            TITLE 34—CRIME CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT                               § 12291

         (II) upon which 1 or more victims, 1 or    (40) Technological abuse
       more individuals who committed the             The term ‘‘technological abuse’’ means an
       harm, and the community can agree; and       act or pattern of behavior that occurs within
     (E) is conducted in a victim services          domestic violence, sexual assault, dating vio-
   framework that protects the safety and sup-      lence or stalking and is intended to harm,
   ports the autonomy of 1 or more victims of       threaten, intimidate, control, stalk, harass,
   the harm and the community.                      impersonate, exploit, extort, or monitor, ex-
 (32) Rural area and rural community                cept as otherwise permitted by law, another
                                                    person, that occurs using any form of tech-
   The term ‘‘rural area’’ and ‘‘rural commu-       nology, including but not limited to: internet
 nity’’ mean—                                       enabled devices, online spaces and platforms,
     (A) any area or community, respectively,       computers, mobile devices, cameras and imag-
   no part of which is within an area designated    ing programs, apps, location tracking devices,
   as a standard metropolitan statistical area      or communication technologies, or any other
   by the Office of Management and Budget;          emerging technologies.
     (B) any area or community, respectively,
                                                    (41) Territorial domestic violence or sexual as-
   that is—
                                                        sault coalition
       (i) within an area designated as a metro-
     politan statistical area or considered as        The term ‘‘territorial domestic violence or
     part of a metropolitan statistical area; and   sexual assault coalition’’ means a program ad-
       (ii) located in a rural census tract; or     dressing domestic or sexual violence that is—
                                                        (A) an established nonprofit, nongovern-
     (C) any federally recognized Indian tribe.       mental territorial coalition addressing do-
 (33) Rural State                                     mestic violence or sexual assault within the
   The term ‘‘rural State’’ means a State that        territory; or
 has a population density of 57 or fewer persons        (B) a nongovernmental organization with a
 per square mile or a State in which the largest      demonstrated history of addressing domestic
 county has fewer than 250,000 people, based on       violence or sexual assault within the terri-
 the most recent decennial census.                    tory that proposes to incorporate as a non-
                                                      profit, nongovernmental territorial coali-
 (34) Sex trafficking
                                                      tion.
   The term ‘‘sex trafficking’’ means any con-      (42) Tribal coalition
 duct proscribed by section 1591 of title 18,
 whether or not the conduct occurs in inter-          The term ‘‘tribal coalition’’ means an estab-
 state or foreign commerce or within the spe-       lished nonprofit, nongovernmental Indian or-
 cial maritime and territorial jurisdiction of      ganization, Alaska Native organization, or a
 the United States.                                 Native Hawaiian organization that—
                                                        (A) provides education, support, and tech-
 (35) Sexual assault                                  nical assistance to member Indian service
   The term ‘‘sexual assault’’ means any non-         providers, Native Hawaiian organizations, or
 consensual sexual act proscribed by Federal,         the Native Hawaiian community in a man-
 tribal, or State law, including when the victim      ner that enables those member providers, or-
 lacks capacity to consent.                           ganizations, or communities to establish and
 (36) Stalking                                        maintain culturally appropriate services, in-
                                                      cluding shelter and rape crisis services, de-
   The term ‘‘stalking’’ means engaging in a          signed to assist Indian or Native Hawaiian
 course of conduct directed at a specific person      women and the dependents of those women
 that would cause a reasonable person to—             who are victims of domestic violence, dating
     (A) fear for his or her safety or the safety     violence, sexual assault, and stalking; and
   of others; or                                        (B) is comprised of board and general
     (B) suffer substantial emotional distress.       members that are representative of—
 (37) State                                               (i) the member service providers, organi-
   The term ‘‘State’’ means each of the several         zations, or communities described in sub-
 States and the District of Columbia, and ex-           paragraph (A); and
 cept as otherwise provided, the Common-                  (ii) the tribal communities or Native Ha-
 wealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American                  waiian communities in which the services
 Samoa, the Virgin Islands, and the Northern            are being provided.
 Mariana Islands.                                   (43) Tribal government
 (38) State domestic violence coalition               The term ‘‘tribal government’’ means—
   The term ‘‘State domestic violence coali-            (A) the governing body of an Indian tribe;
 tion’’ means a program determined by the Ad-         or
 ministration for Children and Families under           (B) a tribe, band, pueblo, nation, or other
 sections 10402 and 10411 of title 42.                organized group or community of Indians,
                                                      including any Alaska Native village or re-
 (39) State sexual assault coalition                  gional or village corporation (as defined in,
   The term ‘‘State sexual assault coalition’’        or established pursuant to, the Alaska Na-
 means a program determined by the Center for         tive Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. 1601 et
 Injury Prevention and Control of the Centers         seq.)), that is recognized as eligible for the
 for Disease Control and Prevention under the         special programs and services provided by
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 280b et         the United States to Indians because of their
 seq.).                                               status as Indians.
§ 12291             TITLE 34—CRIME CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT                                 Page 342

 (44) Tribal nonprofit organization                    mented history of effective work concerning
   The term ‘‘tribal nonprofit organization’’          domestic violence, dating violence, sexual as-
 means—                                                sault, or stalking.
     (A) a victim services provider that has as        (51) Victim services or services
   its primary purpose to assist Native victims          The terms ‘‘victim services’’ and ‘‘services’’
   of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual       mean services provided to victims of domestic
   assault, or stalking; and                           violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or
     (B) staff and leadership of the organization      stalking, including telephonic or web-based
   must include persons with a demonstrated            hotlines, legal assistance and legal advocacy,
   history of assisting American Indian or             economic advocacy, emergency and transi-
   Alaska Native victims of domestic violence,         tional shelter, accompaniment and advocacy
   dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking.       through medical, civil or criminal justice, im-
 (45) Tribal organization                              migration, and social support systems, crisis
   The term ‘‘tribal organization’’ means—             intervention, short-term individual and group
     (A) the governing body of any Indian tribe;       support services, information and referrals,
     (B) any legally established organization of       culturally specific services, population spe-
   Indians which is controlled, sanctioned, or         cific services, and other related supportive
   chartered by such governing body of a tribe         services.
   or tribes to be served, or which is democrat-       (52) Youth
   ically elected by the adult members of the            The term ‘‘youth’’ means a person who is 11
   Indian community to be served by such orga-         to 24 years old.
   nization and which includes the maximum
   participation of Indians in all phases of its     (b) Grant conditions
   activities; or                                      (1) Match
     (C) any tribal nonprofit organization.              No matching funds shall be required for any
 (46) Underserved populations                          grant or subgrant made under this Act for—
   The term ‘‘underserved populations’’ means              (A) any tribe, territory, or victim service
 populations who face barriers in accessing and          provider; or
 using victim services, and includes popu-                 (B) any other entity, including a State,
 lations underserved because of geographic lo-           that—
 cation, religion, sexual orientation, gender                (i) petitions for a waiver of any match
 identity, underserved racial and ethnic popu-             condition imposed by the Attorney Gen-
 lations, populations underserved because of               eral or the Secretaries of Health and
 special needs (such as language barriers, dis-            Human Services or Housing and Urban De-
 abilities, alienage status, or age), and any              velopment; and
 other population determined to be underserved               (ii) whose petition for waiver is deter-
 by the Attorney General or by the Secretary               mined by the Attorney General or the Sec-
 of Health and Human Services, as appropriate.             retaries of Health and Human Services or
                                                           Housing and Urban Development to have
 (47) Unit of local government
                                                           adequately demonstrated the financial
   The term ‘‘unit of local government’’ means             need of the petitioning entity.
 any city, county, township, town, borough,            (2) Nondisclosure of confidential or private in-
 parish, village, or other general purpose polit-          formation
 ical subdivision of a State.
                                                         (A) In general
 (48) Victim advocate
                                                           In order to ensure the safety of adult,
   The term ‘‘victim advocate’’ means a person,
                                                         youth, and child victims of domestic vio-
 whether paid or serving as a volunteer, who
                                                         lence, dating violence, sexual assault, or
 provides services to victims of domestic vio-
                                                         stalking, and their families, grantees and
 lence, sexual assault, stalking, or dating vio-
                                                         subgrantees under this subchapter shall pro-
 lence under the auspices or supervision of a
                                                         tect the confidentiality and privacy of per-
 victim services program.
                                                         sons receiving services.
 (49) Victim assistant
                                                         (B) Nondisclosure
   The term ‘‘victim assistant’’ means a per-
                                                           Subject to subparagraphs (C) and (D),
 son, whether paid or serving as a volunteer,
                                                         grantees and subgrantees shall not—
 who provides services to victims of domestic
                                                             (i) disclose, reveal, or release any person-
 violence, sexual assault, stalking, or dating vi-
                                                           ally identifying information or individual
 olence under the auspices or supervision of a
                                                           information collected in connection with
 court or a law enforcement or prosecution
                                                           services requested, utilized, or denied
 agency.
                                                           through grantees’ and subgrantees’ pro-
 (50) Victim service provider                              grams, regardless of whether the informa-
   The term ‘‘victim service provider’’ means a            tion has been encoded, encrypted, hashed,
 nonprofit, nongovernmental or tribal organi-              or otherwise protected; or
 zation or rape crisis center, including a State             (ii) disclose, reveal, or release individual
 or tribal coalition, that assists or advocates            client information without the informed,
 for domestic violence, dating violence, sexual            written, reasonably time-limited consent
 assault, or stalking victims, including domes-            of the person (or in the case of an
 tic violence shelters, faith-based organiza-              unemancipated minor, the minor and the
 tions, and other organizations, with a docu-              parent or guardian or in the case of legal
Page 343            TITLE 34—CRIME CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT                                  § 12291

     incapacity, a court-appointed guardian)            activities authorized in this Act to the
     about whom information is sought, wheth-           chairman and ranking members of the Com-
     er for this program or any other Federal,          mittee on the Judiciary of the House of Rep-
     State, tribal, or territorial grant program,       resentatives and the Committee on the Judi-
     except that consent for release may not be         ciary of the Senate exercising Congressional
     given by the abuser of the minor, incapaci-        oversight authority. All disclosures shall
     tated person, or the abuser of the other           protect confidentiality and omit personally
     parent of the minor.                               identifying information, including location
   If a minor or a person with a legally ap-            information about individuals.
   pointed guardian is permitted by law to re-          (G) Confidentiality assessment and assur-
   ceive services without the parent’s or guard-           ances
   ian’s consent, the minor or person with a              Grantees and subgrantees must document
   guardian may release information without             their compliance with the confidentiality
   additional consent.                                  and privacy provisions required under this
   (C) Release                                          section.
     If release of information described in sub-
                                                        (H) Death of the party whose privacy had
   paragraph (B) is compelled by statutory or
                                                            been protected
   court mandate—
        (i) grantees and subgrantees shall make           In the event of the death of any victim
     reasonable attempts to provide notice to           whose confidentiality and privacy is re-
     victims affected by the disclosure of infor-       quired to be protected under this subsection,
     mation; and                                        grantees and subgrantees may share person-
        (ii) grantees and subgrantees shall take        ally identifying information or individual
     steps necessary to protect the privacy and         information that is collected about deceased
     safety of the persons affected by the re-          victims being sought for a fatality review to
     lease of the information.                          the extent permitted by their jurisdiction’s
   (D) Information sharing                              law and only if the following conditions are
                                                        met:
     (i) Grantees and subgrantees may share—                (i) The underlying objectives of the fa-
        (I) nonpersonally identifying data in the         tality review are to prevent future deaths,
     aggregate regarding services to their cli-           enhance victim safety, and increase of-
     ents and nonpersonally identifying demo-             fender accountability.
     graphic information in order to comply                 (ii) The fatality review includes policies
     with Federal, State, tribal, or territorial          and protocols to protect identifying infor-
     reporting, evaluation, or data collection            mation, including identifying information
     requirements;                                        about the victim’s children, from further
        (II) court-generated information and law
                                                          release outside the fatality review team.
     enforcement-generated information con-
                                                            (iii) The grantee or subgrantee makes a
     tained in secure, governmental registries
                                                          reasonable effort to get a release from the
     for protection order enforcement purposes;
                                                          victim’s personal representative (if one
     and
                                                          has been appointed) and from any sur-
        (III) law enforcement-generated and
                                                          viving minor children or the guardian of
     prosecution-generated information nec-
                                                          such children (but not if the guardian is
     essary for law enforcement and prosecu-
                                                          the abuser of the deceased parent), if the
     tion purposes.
                                                          children are not capable of knowingly con-
     (ii) In no circumstances may—                        senting.
        (I) an adult, youth, or child victim of do-         (iv) The information released is limited
     mestic violence, dating violence, sexual as-         to that which is necessary for the purposes
     sault, or stalking be required to provide a          of the fatality review.
     consent to release his or her personally
     identifying information as a condition of        (3) Approved activities
     eligibility for the services provided by the       In carrying out the activities under this sub-
     grantee or subgrantee;                           chapter, grantees and subgrantees may col-
        (II) any personally identifying informa-      laborate with or provide information to Fed-
     tion be shared in order to comply with           eral, State, local, tribal, and territorial public
     Federal, tribal, or State reporting, evalua-     officials and agencies to develop and imple-
     tion, or data collection requirements,           ment policies and develop and promote State,
     whether for this program or any other            local, or tribal legislation or model codes de-
     Federal, tribal, or State grant program.         signed to reduce or eliminate domestic vio-
   (E) Statutorily mandated reports of abuse or       lence, dating violence, sexual assault, and
        neglect                                       stalking if—
                                                          (A) the confidentiality and privacy re-
     Nothing in this section prohibits a grantee
                                                        quirements of this subchapter are main-
   or subgrantee from reporting suspected
                                                        tained; and
   abuse or neglect, as those terms are defined
                                                          (B) personally identifying information
   and specifically mandated by the State or
                                                        about adult, youth, and child victims of do-
   tribe involved.
                                                        mestic violence, dating violence, sexual as-
   (F) Oversight                                        sault, and stalking is not requested or in-
     Nothing in this paragraph shall prevent            cluded in any such collaboration or informa-
   the Attorney General from disclosing grant           tion-sharing.
§ 12291             TITLE 34—CRIME CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT                               Page 344

 (4) Non-supplantation                                percent for technical assistance and training
   Any Federal funds received under this sub-         relating to grant programs authorized under
 chapter shall be used to supplement, not sup-        this subchapter, the Office has the authority
 plant, non-Federal funds that would otherwise        to continue setting aside amounts greater
 be available for activities under this sub-          than 8 percent.
 chapter.                                             (B) Requirement
 (5) Use of funds                                       The Office on Violence Against Women
   Funds authorized and appropriated under            shall make all technical assistance available
 this subchapter may be used only for the spe-        as broadly as possible to any appropriate
 cific purposes described in this subchapter and      grantees, subgrantees, potential grantees, or
 shall remain available until expended.               other entities without regard to whether the
                                                      entity has received funding from the Office
 (6) Reports                                          on Violence Against Women for a particular
   An entity receiving a grant under this sub-        program or project, with priority given to
 chapter shall submit to the disbursing agency        recipients awarded a grant before March 15,
 a report detailing the activities undertaken         2022.
 with the grant funds, including and providing      (12) Delivery of legal assistance
 additional information as the agency shall re-
                                                      Any grantee or subgrantee providing legal
 quire.
                                                    assistance with funds awarded under this sub-
 (7) Evaluation                                     chapter shall comply with the eligibility re-
   Federal agencies disbursing funds under this     quirements in section 20121(d) of this title.
 subchapter shall set aside up to 3 percent of      (13) Civil rights
 such funds in order to conduct—                      (A) Nondiscrimination
     (A) evaluations of specific programs or
   projects funded by the disbursing agency              No person in the United States shall, on
   under this subchapter or related research; or       the basis of actual or perceived race, color,
     (B) evaluations of promising practices or         religion, national origin, sex, gender iden-
   problems emerging in the field or related re-       tity (as defined in paragraph 249(c)(4) of title
   search, in order to inform the agency or            18), sexual orientation, or disability, be ex-
   agencies as to which programs or projects           cluded from participation in, be denied the
   are likely to be effective or responsive to         benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination
   needs in the field.                                 under any program or activity funded in
                                                       whole or in part with funds made available
 Final reports of such evaluations shall be            under the Violence Against Women Act of
 made available to the public via the agency’s         1994 (title IV of Public Law 103–322; 108 Stat.
 website.                                              1902), the Violence Against Women Act of
 (8) Nonexclusivity                                    2000 (division B of Public Law 106–386; 114
                                                       Stat. 1491), the Violence Against Women and
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be con-
                                                       Department of Justice Reauthorization Act
 strued to prohibit male victims of domestic vi-
                                                       of 2005 (title IX of Public Law 109–162; 119
 olence, dating violence, sexual assault, and
                                                       Stat. 3080),2 the Violence Against Women
 stalking from receiving benefits and services
                                                       Reauthorization Act of 2013, and any other
 under this subchapter.
                                                       program or activity funded in whole or in
 (9) Prohibition on tort litigation                    part with funds appropriated for grants, co-
   Funds appropriated for the grant program            operative agreements, and other assistance
 under this subchapter may not be used to fund         administered by the Office on Violence
 civil representation in a lawsuit based on a          Against Women.
 tort claim. This paragraph should not be con-         (B) Exception
 strued as a prohibition on providing assistance         If sex segregation or sex-specific program-
 to obtain restitution in a protection order or        ming is necessary to the essential operation
 criminal case.                                        of a program, nothing in this paragraph
 (10) Prohibition on lobbying                          shall prevent any such program or activity
   Any funds appropriated for the grant pro-           from consideration of an individual’s sex. In
 gram shall be subject to the prohibition in sec-      such circumstances, grantees may meet the
 tion 1913 of title 18, relating to lobbying with      requirements of this paragraph by providing
 appropriated moneys.                                  comparable services to individuals who can-
                                                       not be provided with the sex-segregated or
 (11) Technical assistance                             sex-specific programming.
   (A) In general                                      (C) Discrimination
     Of the total amounts appropriated under             The authority of the Attorney General and
   this subchapter, not less than 3 percent and        the Office of Justice Programs to enforce
   up to 8 percent, unless otherwise noted, shall      this paragraph shall be the same as it is
   be available for providing training and tech-       under section 10228 of this title.2
   nical assistance relating to the purposes of
                                                       (D) Construction
   this subchapter to improve the capacity of
   the grantees, subgrantees, and other enti-            Nothing contained in this paragraph shall
   ties. If there is a demonstrated history that       be construed, interpreted, or applied to sup-
   the Office on Violence Against Women has
   previously set aside amounts greater than 8      2 See References in Text note below.
Page 345            TITLE 34—CRIME CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT                               § 12291

   plant, displace, preempt, or otherwise dimin-            (I) deposit an amount equal to the
   ish the responsibilities and liabilities under         grant funds that were improperly award-
   other State or Federal civil rights law,               ed to the grantee into the General Fund
   whether statutory or common.                           of the Treasury; and
 (14) Clarification of victim services and legal            (II) seek to recoup the costs of the re-
     assistance                                           payment to the fund from the grant re-
                                                          cipient that was erroneously awarded
   Victim services and legal assistance under             grant funds.
 this subchapter also include services and as-
                                                     (B) Nonprofit organization requirements
 sistance to—
     (A) victims of domestic violence, dating          (i) Definition
   violence, sexual assault, or stalking who are          For purposes of this paragraph and the
   also victims of severe forms of trafficking in      grant programs described in this Act, the
   persons as defined by section 7102 of title 22;     term ‘‘nonprofit organization’’ means an
     (B) adult survivors of child sexual abuse;        organization that is described in section
   and                                                 501(c)(3) of title 26 and is exempt from tax-
     (C) victims of domestic violence, dating vi-      ation under section 501(a) of such title.
   olence, sexual assault, or stalking who are         (ii) Prohibition
   also victims of female genital mutilation or           The Attorney General may not award a
   cutting, or forced marriage.                        grant under any grant program described
 (15) Accountability                                   in this Act to a nonprofit organization
   All grants awarded by the Attorney General          that holds money in offshore accounts for
 under this Act shall be subject to the fol-           the purpose of avoiding paying the tax de-
 lowing accountability provisions:                     scribed in section 511(a) of title 26.
   (A) Audit requirement                               (iii) Disclosure
     (i) In general                                       Each nonprofit organization that is
                                                       awarded a grant under a grant program de-
        Beginning in the first fiscal year begin-      scribed in this Act and uses the procedures
     ning after the date of the enactment of           prescribed in regulations to create a rebut-
     this Act,2 and in each fiscal year there-         table presumption of reasonableness for
     after, the Inspector General of the Depart-       the compensation of its officers, directors,
     ment of Justice shall conduct audits of re-       trustees and key employees, shall disclose
     cipients of grants under this Act to pre-         to the Attorney General, in the applica-
     vent waste, fraud, and abuse of funds by          tion for the grant, the process for deter-
     grantees. The Inspector General shall de-         mining such compensation, including the
     termine the appropriate number of grant-          independent persons involved in reviewing
     ees to be audited each year.                      and approving such compensation, the
     (ii) Definition                                   comparability data used, and contempora-
        In this paragraph, the term ‘‘unresolved       neous substantiation of the deliberation
     audit finding’’ means a finding in the final      and decision. Upon request, the Attorney
     audit report of the Inspector General of          General shall make the information dis-
     the Department of Justice that the au-            closed under this subsection available for
     dited grantee has utilized grant funds for        public inspection.
     an unauthorized expenditure or otherwise        (C) Conference expenditures
     unallowable cost that is not closed or re-        (i) Limitation
     solved within 12 months from the date                No amounts authorized to be appro-
     when the final audit report is issued.            priated to the Department of Justice under
     (iii) Technical assistance                        this Act may be used by the Attorney Gen-
        A recipient of grant funds under this Act      eral, or by any individual or organization
     that is found to have an unresolved audit         awarded discretionary funds through a co-
     finding shall be eligible to receive prompt,      operative agreement under this Act, to
     individualized technical assistance to re-        host or support any expenditure for con-
     solve the audit finding and to prevent fu-        ferences that uses more than $100,000 in
     ture findings, for a period not to exceed         Department funds, unless the Director or
     the following 2 fiscal years.                     Principal Deputy Director of the Office on
                                                       Violence Against Women or the Deputy
     (iv) Priority
                                                       Attorney General or such Assistant Attor-
        In awarding grants under this Act, the         ney Generals, Directors, or principal depu-
     Attorney General shall give priority to eli-      ties as the Deputy Attorney General may
     gible entities that did not have an unre-         designate, provides prior written author-
     solved audit finding during the 3 fiscal          ization that the funds may be expended to
     years prior to submitting an application          host a conference.
     for a grant under this Act.                       (ii) Written approval
     (v) Reimbursement                                    Written approval under clause (i) shall
        If an entity is awarded grant funds under      include a written estimate of all costs as-
     this Act during the 2-fiscal-year period in       sociated with the conference, including the
     which the entity is barred from receiving         cost of all food and beverages, audiovisual
     grants under paragraph (2), the Attorney          equipment, honoraria for speakers, and
     General shall—                                    any entertainment.
§ 12291                  TITLE 34—CRIME CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT                                               Page 346

      (iii) Report                                               The Public Health Service Act, referred to in subsec.
                                                               (a)(39), is act July 1, 1944, ch. 373, 58 Stat. 682, which is
        The Deputy Attorney General shall sub-                 classified generally to chapter 6A (§ 201 et seq.) of Title
      mit an annual report to the Committee on                 42, The Public Health and Welfare. For complete classi-
      the Judiciary of the Senate and the Com-                 fication of this Act to the Code, see Short Title note
      mittee on the Judiciary of the House of                  set out under section 201 of Title 42 and Tables.
      Representatives on all approved con-                       This Act, referred to in subsec. (b)(1), (2)(F), (15), is
      ference expenditures referenced in this                  Pub. L. 103–322, Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 1796, known as
      paragraph.                                               the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of
                                                               1994. For complete classification of this Act to the
    (D) Annual certification                                   Code, see Short Title of 1994 Act note set out under sec-
      Beginning in the first fiscal year beginning             tion 10101 of this title and Tables.
    after the date of the enactment of this Act,2                The Violence Against Women Act of 1994, referred to
                                                               in subsec. (b)(13)(A), is title IV of Pub. L. 103–322, Sept.
    the Attorney General shall submit, to the                  13, 1994, 108 Stat. 1902. For complete classification of
    Committee on the Judiciary and the Com-                    this Act to the Code, see Short Title of 1994 Act note
    mittee on Appropriations of the Senate and                 set out under section 10101 of this title and Tables.
    the Committee on the Judiciary and the                       The Violence Against Women Act of 2000, referred to
    Committee on Appropriations of the House                   in subsec. (b)(13)(A), is div. B of Pub. L. 106–386, Oct. 28,
    of Representatives, an annual certification                2000, 114 Stat. 1491. For complete classification of this
    that—                                                      Act to the Code, see Short Title of 2000 Act note set out
        (i) all audits issued by the Office of the             under section 10101 of this title and Tables.
                                                                 The Violence Against Women and Department of Jus-
      Inspector General under paragraph (1) have               tice Reauthorization Act of 2005, referred to in subsec.
      been completed and reviewed by the appro-                (b)(13)(A), is Pub. L. 109–162, Jan. 5, 2006, 119 Stat. 2960.
      priate Assistant Attorney General or Di-                 For complete classification of this Act to the Code, see
      rector;                                                  Short Title of 2006 Act note set out under section 10101
        (ii) all mandatory exclusions required                 of this title and Tables.
      under subparagraph (A)(iii) have been                      The Violence Against Women Reauthorization Act of
      issued;                                                  2013, referred to in subsec. (b)(13)(A), is Pub. L. 113–4,
        (iii) all reimbursements required under                Mar. 7, 2013, 127 Stat. 54. For complete classification of
                                                               this Act to the Code, see Short Title of 2013 Act note
      subparagraph (A)(v) have been made; and                  set out under section 10101 of this title and Tables.
        (iv) includes a list of any grant recipi-                Section 10228 of this title, referred to in subsec.
      ents excluded under subparagraph (A) from                (b)(13)(C), was in the original a reference to ‘‘section
      the previous year.                                       3789d of title 42, United States Code’’ but probably
  (16) Innovation fund                                         should have been a reference to section 809 of Pub. L.
                                                               90–351, which was formerly classified to section 3789d of
    Of the amounts appropriated to carry out                   Title 42, The Public Health and Welfare, prior to edi-
  this subchapter, not more than 1 percent shall               torial reclassification as section 10228 of this title.
  be made available for pilot projects, dem-                     The date of the enactment of this Act, referred to in
  onstration projects, and special initiatives de-             subsec. (b)(15)(A)(i), (D), probably means the date of en-
  signed to improve Federal, State, local, Trib-               actment of Pub. L. 113–4, which enacted subsec. (b)(16)
  al, and other community responses to gender-                 [now (b)(15)] of this section and was approved Mar. 7,
                                                               2013.
  based violence.
                                                                                       CODIFICATION
(Pub. L. 103–322, title IV, § 40002, as added Pub. L.
109–162, § 3(a), Jan. 5, 2006, 119 Stat. 2964; amend-            Section was formerly classified to section 13925 of
ed Pub. L. 109–271, §§ 1(d)–(f), 2(e), Aug. 12, 2006,          Title 42, The Public Health and Welfare, prior to edi-
120 Stat. 751, 752; Pub. L. 111–320, title II, § 202(d),       torial reclassification and renumbering as this section.
                                                               Some section numbers or references in amendment
Dec. 20, 2010, 124 Stat. 3509; Pub. L. 113–4, § 3,
                                                               notes below reflect the classification of such sections
Mar. 7, 2013, 127 Stat. 56; Pub. L. 117–103, div. W,           or references prior to editorial reclassification.
§ 2(a), Mar. 15, 2022, 136 Stat. 840; Pub. L. 117–315,
§ 2(b), Dec. 27, 2022, 136 Stat. 4404.)                                                AMENDMENTS
                                                                  2022—Subsec. (a). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(A), sub-
                     Editorial Notes                           stituted ‘‘In this subchapter, for the purpose of grants
                                                               authorized under this subchapter’’ for ‘‘In this sub-
                  REFERENCES IN TEXT
                                                               chapter’’ in introductory provisions.
  This subchapter, referred to in text, was in the origi-         Subsec. (a)(1), (2). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(N), (O),
nal ‘‘this title’’, meaning title IV of Pub. L. 103–322,       added par. (1) and redesignated former par. (1) as (2).
Sept. 13, 1994, 108 Stat. 1902, known as the Violence          Former par. (2) redesignated (7).
Against Women Act of 1994. For complete classification            Subsec. (a)(4), (5). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(M), redesig-
of title IV to the Code, see Short Title of 1994 Act note      nated pars. (4) and (5) as (5) and (4), respectively, and
set out under section 10101 of this title and Tables.          transferred par. (4) to appear after par. (3).
  The Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, referred               Subsec. (a)(6). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(P), added par.
to in subsec. (a)(2), (22), (43)(B), is Pub. L. 92–203, Dec.   (6). Former par. (6) redesignated (8).
18, 1971, 85 Stat. 688, which is classified generally to          Subsec. (a)(7). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(L), redesig-
chapter 33 (§ 1601 et seq.) of Title 43, Public Lands. For     nated par. (2) as (7) and transferred it to appear before
complete classification of this Act to the Code, see           par. (8). Former par. (7) redesignated (9).
Short Title note set out under section 1601 of Title 43           Subsec. (a)(8), (9). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(K), redesig-
and Tables.                                                    nated pars. (6) and (7) as (8) and (9), respectively.
  The Native American Housing Assistance and Self-             Former pars. (8) and (9) redesignated (12) and (10), re-
Determination Act of 1996, referred to in subsec. (a)(20),     spectively.
is Pub. L. 104–330, Oct. 26, 1996, 110 Stat. 4016, which is       Subsec. (a)(10), (11). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(I), redes-
classified principally to chapter 43 (§ 4101 et seq.) of       ignated pars. (9) and (10) as (10) and (11), respectively.
Title 25, Indians. For complete classification of this         Former par. (11) redesignated (14).
Act to the Code, see Short Title note set out under sec-          Subsec. (a)(12). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(Q), substituted
tion 4101 of Title 25 and Tables.                              ‘‘includes felony or misdemeanor crimes committed by
Page 347                  TITLE 34—CRIME CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT                                                   § 12291

a current or former spouse or intimate partner of the             Former pars. (41) and (42) redesignated (48) and (49), re-
victim under the family or domestic violence laws of              spectively.
the jurisdiction receiving grant funding and, in the                 Subsec. (a)(42)(A). Pub. L. 117–315, § 2(b)(1), inserted
case of victim services, includes the use or attempted            ‘‘, Native Hawaiian organizations, or the Native Hawai-
use of physical abuse or sexual abuse, or a pattern of            ian community’’ after ‘‘Indian service providers’’,
any other coercive behavior committed, enabled, or so-            ‘‘, organizations, or communities’’ after ‘‘member pro-
licited to gain or maintain power and control over a              viders’’, and ‘‘or Native Hawaiian’’ after ‘‘designed to
victim, including verbal, psychological, economic, or             assist Indian’’.
technological abuse that may or may not constitute                   Subsec. (a)(42)(B)(i). Pub. L. 117–315, § 2(b)(2)(A), in-
criminal behavior, by a person who—’’ and subpars. (A)            serted ‘‘, organizations, or communities’’ after ‘‘mem-
to (D) for ‘‘includes felony or misdemeanor crimes of             ber service providers’’.
violence committed by a current or former spouse or                  Subsec. (a)(42)(B)(ii). Pub. L. 117–315, § 2(b)(2)(B), in-
intimate partner of the victim, by a person with whom             serted ‘‘or Native Hawaiian communities’’ after ‘‘tribal
the victim shares a child in common, by a person who              communities’’.
is cohabitating with or has cohabitated with the victim              Subsec. (a)(43) to (49). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(C), re-
as a spouse or intimate partner, by a person similarly            designated pars. (36) to (42) as (43) to (49), respectively.
situated to a spouse of the victim under the domestic             Former pars. (43) to (45) redesignated (50) to (52), re-
or family violence laws of the jurisdiction receiving             spectively.
grant monies, or by any other person against an adult                Subsec. (a)(50). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(B), redesig-
or youth victim who is protected from that person’s               nated par. (43) as (50).
acts under the domestic or family violence laws of the               Subsec. (a)(51). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(Y), inserted
jurisdiction.’’                                                   ‘‘legal assistance and’’ before ‘‘legal advocacy’’.
   Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(J), redesignated par. (8) as (12)      Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(B), redesignated par. (44) as
and transferred it to appear after par. (11). Former par.         (51).
                                                                     Subsec. (a)(52). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(B), redesig-
(12) redesignated (17).
   Subsec. (a)(13) to (16). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(H), (R),   nated par. (45) as (52).
(S), added pars. (13), (15) and (16) and redesignated par.           Subsec. (b)(2)(H). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(2)(A), added
(11) as (14). Former pars. (13) to (16) redesignated (18) to      subpar. (H).
                                                                     Subsec. (b)(3). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(2)(B), substituted
(20) and (22), respectively.
   Subsec. (a)(17). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(T), added par.     ‘‘if—’’ and subpars. (A) and (B) for period at end.
                                                                     Subsec. (b)(11). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(2)(C), designated
(17) and struck out former par. (17). Prior to amend-
                                                                  existing provisions as subpar. (A), inserted heading and
ment, text read as follows: ‘‘The term ‘homeless’ has
                                                                  added subpar. (B).
the meaning provided in section 12473(6) of this title.’’
   Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(G), redesignated par. (12) as          Subsec. (b)(14). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(2)(D), sub-
(17). Former par. (17) redesignated (21).                         stituted ‘‘to—’’ for ‘‘to’’, inserted subpar. (A) designa-
   Subsec. (a)(18) to (21). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(F), (G),   tion before ‘‘victims of domestic violence’’, and added
redesignated pars. (13) to (15) and (17) as (18) to (21), re-     subpars. (B) and (C).
spectively. Former pars. (18) to (21) redesignated (23) to           Subsec. (b)(15). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(2)(E), (F), redes-
(26), respectively.                                               ignated par. (16) as (15) and struck out former par. (15)
   Subsec. (a)(22). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(U), inserted       which related to establishment of biennial conferral
‘‘; Indian Tribe’’ after ‘‘tribe’’ in heading and sub-            process.
stituted ‘‘terms ‘Indian tribe’ and ‘Indian Tribe’ mean’’            Subsec. (b)(15)(A)(iii). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(2)(G)(i),
for ‘‘term ‘Indian tribe’ means’’ in text.                        added cl. (iii) and struck out former cl. (iii). Prior to
   Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(F), redesignated par. (16) as       amendment, text read as follows: ‘‘A recipient of grant
(22) and transferred it to appear before par. (23). Former        funds under this Act that is found to have an unre-
par. (22) redesignated (27).                                      solved audit finding shall not be eligible to receive
   Subsec. (a)(23). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(E), redesig-       grant funds under this Act during the following 2 fiscal
nated par. (18) as (23). Former par. (23) redesignated            years.’’
(28).                                                                Subsec. (b)(15)(C)(i). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(2)(G)(ii),
   Subsec. (a)(24). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(V), added par.     substituted ‘‘$100,000’’ for ‘‘$20,000’’ and, which directed
(24) and struck out former par. (24). Prior to amend-             the insertion of ‘‘the Director or Principal Deputy Di-
ment, text read as follows: ‘‘The term ‘legal assistance’         rector of the Office on Violence Against Women or’’ be-
includes assistance to adult and youth victims of do-             fore ‘‘the Deputy Attorney General’’, was executed by
mestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and             making the insertion before ‘‘the Deputy Attorney
stalking in—                                                      General or’’, to reflect the probable intent of Congress.
     ‘‘(A) family, tribal, territorial, immigration, em-             Subsec. (b)(16). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(2)(H), added par.
   ployment, administrative agency, housing matters,              (16). Former par. (16) redesignated (15).
   campus administrative or protection or stay away                  2013—Subsec. (a)(1). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(3), added par.
   order proceedings, and other similar matters; and              (1). Former par. (1) redesignated (2).
     ‘‘(B) criminal justice investigations, prosecutions             Subsec. (a)(2). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(H), redesignated
   and post-trial matters (including sentencing, parole,          par. (1) as (2). Former par. (2) redesignated (3).
   and probation) that impact the victim’s safety and                Subsec. (a)(3). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(4), substituted ‘‘se-
   privacy.                                                       rious harm to an unemancipated minor.’’ for ‘‘serious
‘‘Intake or referral, by itself, does not constitute legal        harm.’’
assistance.’’                                                        Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(H), redesignated par. (2) as (3).
   Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(E), redesignated par. (19) as       Former par. (3) redesignated (4).
(24). Former par. (24) redesignated (29).                            Subsec. (a)(4). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(5), substituted ‘‘The
   Subsec. (a)(25) to (30). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(E), re-    term ‘community-based organization’ means a non-
designated pars. (20) to (25) as (25) to (30), respectively.      profit, nongovernmental, or tribal organization that
Former pars. (26) to (30) redesignated (32) to (36), re-          serves a specific geographic community that—’’ for
spectively.                                                       ‘‘The term ‘community-based organization’ means an
   Subsec. (a)(31). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(W), added par.     organization that—’’ in introductory provisions.
(31). Former par. (31) redesignated (37).                            Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(H), redesignated par. (3) as (4).
   Subsec. (a)(32) to (39). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(D), re-    Former par. (4) redesignated (5).
designated pars. (26) to (33) as (32) to (39), respectively.         Subsec. (a)(5). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(H), redesignated
Former pars. (34) to (39) redesignated (41) to (46), re-          par. (4) as (5).
spectively.                                                          Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(1), struck out par. (5), which de-
   Subsec. (a)(40). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(X), added par.     fined ‘‘court-based’’ and ‘‘court-related personnel’’.
(40). Former par. (40) redesignated (47).                            Subsec. (a)(6), (7). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(6), added pars.
   Subsec. (a)(41), (42). Pub. L. 117–103, § 2(a)(1)(C), redes-   (6) and (7). Former pars. (6) and (7) redesignated (8) and
ignated pars. (34) and (35) as (41) and (42), respectively.       (9), respectively.
§ 12291                   TITLE 34—CRIME CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT                                                  Page 348

   Subsec. (a)(8). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(7), inserted ‘‘or inti-      Subsec. (b)(2)(B). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(b)(1)(A), added cls.
mate partner’’ after ‘‘former spouse’’ and after ‘‘as a            (i) and (ii) and concluding provisions, and struck out
spouse’’.                                                          former cls. (i) and (ii) which read as follows:
   Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(G), redesignated par. (6) as (8).         ‘‘(i) disclose any personally identifying information
Former par. (8) redesignated (10).                                 or individual information collected in connection with
   Subsec. (a)(9) to (11). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(G), redes-     services requested, utilized, or denied through grantees’
ignated pars. (7) to (9) as (9) to (11), respectively.             and subgrantees’ programs; or
Former pars. (10) and (11) redesignated (13) and (14), re-            ‘‘(ii) reveal individual client information without the
spectively.                                                        informed, written, reasonably time-limited consent of
   Subsec. (a)(12). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(8), added par. (12).     the person (or in the case of an unemancipated minor,
Former par. (12) redesignated (15).                                the minor and the parent or guardian or in the case of
   Subsec. (a)(13) to (16). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(F), redes-    persons with disabilities, the guardian) about whom in-
ignated pars. (10) to (13) as (13) to (16), respectively.          formation is sought, whether for this program or any
Former pars. (14) to (16) redesignated (17) to (19), re-           other Federal, State, tribal, or territorial grant pro-
spectively.                                                        gram, except that consent for release may not be given
   Subsec. (a)(17). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(F), redesignated      by the abuser of the minor, person with disabilities, or
par. (14) as (17).                                                 the abuser of the other parent of the minor.’’
   Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(1), struck out par. (17), which de-          Subsec. (b)(2)(D). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(b)(1)(B), amended
fined ‘‘linguistically and culturally specific services’’.         subpar. (D) generally. Prior to amendment, text read as
   Subsec. (a)(18). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(9), inserted ‘‘or        follows:‘‘Grantees and subgrantees may share—
                                                                         ‘‘(i) nonpersonally identifying data in the aggregate
Village Public Safety Officers’’ after ‘‘governmental
                                                                      regarding services to their clients and nonpersonally
victim services programs’’.
                                                                      identifying demographic information in order to com-
   Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(F), redesignated par. (15) as (18).
   Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(1), struck out par. (18), which de-          ply with Federal, State, tribal, or territorial report-
                                                                      ing, evaluation, or data collection requirements;
fined ‘‘personally identifying information’’ or ‘‘per-
                                                                         ‘‘(ii) court-generated information and law-enforce-
sonal information’’.                                                  ment generated information contained in secure, gov-
   Subsec. (a)(19). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(10), inserted at end
                                                                      ernmental registries for protection order enforce-
‘‘Intake or referral, by itself, does not constitute legal
                                                                      ment purposes; and
assistance.’’                                                            ‘‘(iii) law enforcement- and prosecution-generated
   Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(F), redesignated par. (16) as (19).       information necessary for law enforcement and pros-
Former par. (19) redesignated (23).                                   ecution purposes.’’
   Subsec. (a)(20) to (22). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(11), added          Subsec. (b)(2)(E) to (G). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(b)(1)(C)–(E),
pars. (20) to (22). Former pars. (20), (21), and (22) redesig-     added subpars. (E) and (G) and redesignated former sub-
nated (24), (26), and (27), respectively.                          par. (E) as (F).
   Subsec. (a)(23). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(12), substituted            Subsec. (b)(3). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(b)(2), added par. (3)
‘‘assistance’’ for ‘‘services’’.                                   and struck out former par. (3). Prior to amendment,
   Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(E), redesignated par. (19) as (23).    text read as follows: ‘‘In carrying out the activities
   Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(1), struck out par. (23), which de-       under this subchapter, grantees and subgrantees may
fined ‘‘sexual assault’’.                                          collaborate with and provide information to Federal,
   Subsec. (a)(24). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(E), redesignated      State, local, tribal, and territorial public officials and
par. (20) as (24). Former par. (24) redesignated (30).             agencies to develop and implement policies to reduce or
   Subsec. (a)(25). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(13), added par. (25).    eliminate domestic violence, dating violence, sexual as-
Former par. (25) redesignated (31).                                sault, and stalking.’’
   Subsec. (a)(26). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(D), redesignated         Subsec. (b)(7). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(b)(3), inserted at end
par. (21) as (26). Former par. (26) redesignated (32).             ‘‘Final reports of such evaluations shall be made avail-
   Subsec. (a)(26)(C). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(14), added sub-       able to the public via the agency’s website.’’
par. (C).                                                             Subsec. (b)(12) to (16). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(b)(4), added
   Subsec. (a)(27). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(15), substituted         pars. (12) to (16).
‘‘57’’ for ‘‘52’’ and ‘‘250,000’’ for ‘‘150,000’’.                    2010—Subsec. (a)(26). Pub. L. 111–320 substituted
   Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(D), redesignated par. (22) as (27).    ‘‘under sections 10402 and 10411 of this title’’ for ‘‘under
Former par. (27) redesignated (33).                                the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (42
   Subsec. (a)(28). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(16), added par. (28).    U.S.C. 10410(b))’’.
Former par. (28) redesignated (34).                                   2006—Subsec. (a)(1). Pub. L. 109–271, § 1(e)(1), sub-
   Subsec. (a)(29). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(16), added par. (29).    stituted ‘‘Alaska Native’’ for ‘‘Alaskan’’.
   Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(1), struck out par. (29) which de-           Subsec. (a)(23). Pub. L. 109–271, § 1(d), substituted
fined ‘‘tribal coalition’’.                                        ‘‘proscribed’’ for ‘‘prescribed’’.
   Subsec. (a)(30) to (32). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(C), redes-       Subsec. (a)(31) to (37). Pub. L. 109–271, § 1(e)(2), (3),
ignated pars. (24) to (26) as (30) to (32), respectively.          added par. (31) and redesignated former pars. (31) to (36)
Former pars. (30) to (32) redesignated (36) to (38), re-           as (32) to (37), respectively.
spectively.                                                           Subsec. (b)(1). Pub. L. 109–271, § 1(f), added par. (1) and
   Subsec. (a)(33). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(C), redesignated      struck out former par. (1) which read as follows: ‘‘No
par. (27) as (33).                                                 matching funds shall be required for a grant or
   Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(1), struck out par. (33) which de-        subgrant made under this subchapter for any tribe, ter-
fined ‘‘underserved populations’’.                                 ritory, victim service provider, or any entity that the
   Subsec. (a)(34). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(C), redesignated      Attorney General determines has adequately dem-
par. (28) as (34). Former par. (34) redesignated (41).             onstrated financial need.’’
   Subsec. (a)(35). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(17), added par. (35).       Subsec. (b)(11). Pub. L. 109–271, § 2(e), inserted ‘‘Of the
Former par. (35) redesignated (42).                                total amounts appropriated under this subchapter, not
   Subsec. (a)(36), (37). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(B), redesig-    less than 3 percent and up to 8 percent, unless other-
nated pars. (30) and (31) as (36) and (37), respectively.          wise noted, shall be available for providing training
   Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(1), struck out pars. (36) and (37),       and technical assistance relating to the purposes of
which defined ‘‘victim services’’ or ‘‘victim service pro-         this subchapter to improve the capacity of the grant-
vider’’ and ‘‘youth’’, respectively.                               ees, subgrantees, and other entities.’’ before ‘‘If there is
   Subsec. (a)(38). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(B), redesignated      a demonstrated history’’.
par. (32) as (38).
   Subsec. (a)(39), (40). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(18), added                Statutory Notes and Related Subsidiaries
pars. (39) and (40).
   Subsec. (a)(41), (42). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(2)(A), redesig-              EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2022 AMENDMENT
nated pars. (34) and (35) as (41) and (42), respectively.            Amendment by Pub. L. 117–315 effective one day after
   Subsec. (a)(43) to (45). Pub. L. 113–4, § 3(a)(19), added       Dec. 27, 2022, see section 3 of Pub. L. 117–315, set out as
pars. (43) to (45).                                                a note under section 10441 of this title.
Page 349                TITLE 34—CRIME CONTROL AND LAW ENFORCEMENT                                               § 12291

  Amendment by Pub. L. 117–103 not effective until Oct.           ‘‘(13) More than 500 men and women call the Na-
1 of the first fiscal year beginning after Mar. 15, 2022,       tional Domestic Violence Hotline every day to get
see section 4(a) of div. W of Pub. L. 117–103, set out as       immediate, informed, and confidential assistance to
an Effective Date note under section 6851 of Title 15,          help deal with family violence.
Commerce and Trade.                                               ‘‘(14) The National Domestic Violence Hotline serv-
                                                                ice is available, toll-free, 24 hours a day and 7 days a
         EFFECTIVE DATE OF 2013 AMENDMENT                       week, with bilingual staff, access to translators in 150
  Amendment by Pub. L. 113–4 not effective until the            languages, and a TTY line for the hearing-impaired.
beginning of the fiscal year following Mar. 7, 2013, see          ‘‘(15) With access to over 5,000 shelters and service
section 4 of Pub. L. 113–4, set out as a note under sec-        providers across the United States, Puerto Rico, and
tion 2261 of Title 18, Crimes and Criminal Procedure.           the United States Virgin Islands, the National Do-
                                                                mestic Violence Hotline provides crisis intervention
                        FINDINGS                                and immediately connects callers with sources of
  Pub. L. 109–162, title II, § 201, Jan. 5, 2006, 119 Stat.     help in their local community.
2993, provided that: ‘‘Congress finds the following:              ‘‘(16) Approximately 60 percent of the callers indi-
    ‘‘(1) Nearly 1⁄3 of American women report physical          cate that calling the Hotline is their first attempt to
  or sexual abuse by a husband or boyfriend at some             address a domestic violence situation and that they
  point in their lives.                                         have not called the police or any other support serv-
    ‘‘(2) According to the National Crime Victimization         ices.
  Survey, 248,000 Americans 12 years of age and older             ‘‘(17) Between 2000 and 2003, there was a 27 percent
  were raped or sexually assaulted in 2002.                     increase in call volume at the National Domestic Vi-
    ‘‘(3) Rape and sexual assault in the United States is       olence Hotline.
  estimated to cost $127,000,000,000 per year, including—         ‘‘(18) Improving technology infrastructure at the
       ‘‘(A) lost productivity;                                 National Domestic Violence Hotline and training ad-
       ‘‘(B) medical and mental health care;                    vocates, volunteers, and other staff on upgraded tech-
       ‘‘(C) police and fire services;                          nology will drastically increase the Hotline’s ability
       ‘‘(D) social services;                                   to answer more calls quickly and effectively.’’
       ‘‘(E) loss of and damage to property; and                Pub. L. 109–162, title III, § 301, Jan. 5, 2006, 119 Stat.
       ‘‘(F) reduced quality of life.                         3003, provided that: ‘‘Congress finds the following:
    ‘‘(4) Nonreporting of sexual assault in rural areas is        ‘‘(1) Youth, under the age of 18, account for 67 per-
  a particular problem because of the high rate of non-         cent of all sexual assault victimizations reported to
  stranger sexual assault.                                      law enforcement officials.
    ‘‘(5) Geographic isolation often compounds the                ‘‘(2) The Department of Justice consistently finds
  problems facing sexual assault victims. The lack of           that young women between the ages of 16 and 24 expe-
  anonymity and accessible support services can limit           rience the highest rate of non-fatal intimate partner
  opportunities for justice for victims.                        violence.
    ‘‘(6) Domestic elder abuse is primarily family                ‘‘(3) In 1 year, over 4,000 incidents of rape or sexual
  abuse. The National Elder Abuse Incidence Study               assault occurred in public schools across the country.
  found that the perpetrator was a family member in 90            ‘‘(4) Young people experience particular obstacles
  percent of cases.                                             to seeking help. They often do not have access to
    ‘‘(7) Barriers for older victims leaving abusive rela-      money, transportation, or shelter services. They
  tionships include—                                            must overcome issues such as distrust of adults, lack
       ‘‘(A) the inability to support themselves;               of knowledge about available resources, or pressure
