GH Real Estate approved legal-source text chunk — GH-FED-03_CONDITIONAL-HUD-HCV-VAWA-Section504-Programs.part-002.txt — verified through 2026-07-12. Official source text controls.

 identified in § 982.54(d)(21)(iii).
 (c) Eligible inspection methods. (1) A PHA may rely upon inspections of housing assisted under the HOME Investment Partnerships (HOME)
 program or housing financed using Low-Income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTCs), or inspections performed by HUD.
 (2) If a PHA wishes to rely on an inspection method other than a method listed in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, then, prior to amending its
 Administrative Plan, the PHA must submit to the Real Estate Assessment Center (REAC) a copy of the inspection method it wishes to use, along
 with its analysis of the inspection method that shows that the method “provides the same or greater protection to occupants of dwelling units” as
 would HQS.
 (i) A PHA may rely upon such alternative inspection method only upon receiving approval from REAC to do so.
 (ii) A PHA that uses an alternative inspection method approved under this paragraph must monitor changes to the standards and requirements
 applicable to such method. If any change is made to the alternative inspection method, then the PHA must submit to REAC a copy of the revised
 standards and requirements, along with a revised comparison to HQS. If the PHA or REAC determines that the revision would cause the
 alternative inspection to no longer meet or exceed HQS, then the PHA may no longer rely upon the alternative inspection method to comply with
 the inspection requirement at § 982.405(a) and (b).
 (d) Use of alternative inspection. (1) If an alternative inspection method employs sampling, then a PHA may rely on such alternative inspection
 method for purposes of an initial or periodic inspection only if units occupied by voucher program participants are included in the population of
 units forming the basis of the sample.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 38
 (2) In order for a PHA to rely upon the results of an alternative inspection for purposes of an initial or periodic inspection, a property inspected
 pursuant to such method must meet the standards or requirements regarding housing quality or safety applicable to properties assisted under the
 program using the alternative inspection method. To make the determination of whether such standards or requirements are met, the PHA must
 adhere to the following procedures:
 (i) If a property is inspected under an alternative inspection method, and the property receives a “pass” score, then the PHA may rely on that
 inspection.
 (ii) If a property is inspected under an alternative inspection method, and the property receives a “fail” score, then the PHA may not rely on that
 inspection.
 (iii) If a property is inspected under an alternative inspection method that does not employ a pass/fail determination—for example, in the case of a
 program where deficiencies are simply identified—then the PHA must review the list of deficiencies to determine whether any cited deficiency
 would have resulted in a “fail” score under HQS. If no such deficiency exists, then the PHA may rely on the inspection. If such a deficiency does
 exist, then the PHA may not rely on the inspection.
 (3) Under any circumstance described in paragraph (d)(2) of this section in which a PHA is prohibited from relying on an alternative inspection
 method for a property, the PHA must, within a reasonable period of time, conduct an HQS inspection of any units in the property occupied by
 voucher program participants and follow HQS procedures to remedy any identified deficiencies.
 (e) Initial inspections using the alternative inspection option. (1) The PHA may approve the tenancy, allow the family to enter into the lease
 agreement, and execute the HAP contract for a unit that has been inspected in the previous 24 months where the alternative inspection meets the
 requirements of this section. If the PHA has established and the unit is covered by both the NLT option under § 982.405(j) and the alternative
 inspections option for the initial HQS inspection, see paragraph (f) of this section.
 (2) The PHA notifies the owner and the family that the unit selected by the family is eligible for the alternative inspection option. The PHA must
 provide the family with the PHA list of HQS deficiencies that are considered life-threatening as part of this notification. If the owner and family
 agree to the use of this option, the PHA approves the assisted tenancy, allows the family to enter into the lease agreement with the owner, and
 executes the HAP contract on the basis of the alternative inspection.
 (3) The PHA must conduct an HQS inspection within 30 days of receiving the Request for Tenancy Approval. If the family reports a deficiency
 to the PHA prior to the PHA's HQS inspection, the PHA must inspect the unit within the time period required under § 982.405(d) or within 30
 days of the effective date of the HAP contract, whichever time period ends first.
 (4) The PHA must enter into the HAP contract with the owner before conducting the HQS inspection. The PHA may not make housing assistance
 payments to the owner until the PHA has inspected the unit.
 (5) The PHA may commence housing assistance payments to the owner and make housing assistance payments retroactive to the effective date of
 the HAP contract only after the unit passes the PHA's HQS inspection. If the unit does not pass the HQS inspection, the PHA may not make
 housing assistance payments to the owner until all the deficiencies have been corrected. If a deficiency is life-threatening, the owner must correct
 the deficiency within 24 hours of notification from the PHA. For other deficiencies, the owner must correct the deficiency within no more than 30
 calendar days (or any PHA-approved extension) of notification from the PHA. If the owner corrects the deficiencies within the required cure
 period, the PHA makes the housing assistance payments retroactive to the effective date of the HAP contract.
 (6) The PHA establishes in the Administrative Plan:
 (i) The maximum amount of time it will withhold payments if the owner does not correct the deficiencies within the required cure period before
 abating payments; and
 (ii) The number of days after which the PHA will terminate the HAP contract for the owner's failure to correct the deficiencies, which may not
 exceed 180 days from the effective date of the HAP contract.
 (7) The owner may not terminate the tenancy of the family due to the withholding or abatement of assistance under this paragraph (e). During the
 period that assistance is abated, the family may terminate the tenancy by notifying the owner and the PHA. If the family chooses to terminate the
 tenancy, the HAP contract will automatically terminate on the effective date of the tenancy termination or the date the family vacates the unit,
 whichever is earlier. The PHA must promptly issue the family its voucher to move.
 (f) Initial inspection: using the alternative inspection option in combination with the non-life-threatening deficiencies option. (1) The PHA
 notifies the owner and the family that both the alternative inspection option and the NLT option are available for the unit selected by the family.
 The PHA must provide the family the list of HQS deficiencies that are considered life-threatening as part of this notification. If the owner and
 family agree to the use of both options, the PHA approves the assisted tenancy, allows the family to enter into the lease agreement with the
 owner, and executes the HAP contract on the basis of the alternative inspection.
 (2) The PHA must conduct an HQS inspection within 30 days after the family and owner submit a complete Request for Tenancy Approval. If the
 family reports a deficiency to the PHA prior to the PHA's HQS inspection, the PHA must inspect the unit within the time period required under §
 982.405(d) or within 30 days of the effective date of the HAP contract, whichever time period ends first.
 (3) The PHA must enter into the HAP contract with the owner before conducting the HQS inspection. The PHA may not make housing assistance
 payments to the owner until the PHA has inspected the unit. If the unit passes the HQS inspection, the PHA commences making housing


GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                            Page 39
 assistance payments to the owner and makes payments retroactive to the effective date of the HAP contract.
 (4) If the unit fails the PHA's HQS inspection but has no life-threatening deficiencies, the PHA commences making housing assistance payments,
 which are made retroactive to the effective date of the HAP contract. The owner must correct the deficiencies within 30 days from the effective
 date of the HAP contract. If the owner fails to correct the deficiencies within the 30-day cure period, the PHA must withhold the housing
 assistance payments until the owner makes the repairs and the PHA verifies the correction. Once the unit is in compliance with HQS, the PHA
 may use the withheld housing assistance payments to make payments for the period that payments were withheld.
 (5) If the unit does not pass the HQS inspection and has life-threatening deficiencies, the PHA may not commence making housing assistance
 payments to the owner until all the deficiencies have been corrected. The owner must correct all life-threatening deficiencies within 24 hours of
 notification from the PHA. For other deficiencies, the owner must correct the deficiency within 30 days (or any PHA-approved extension) of
 notification from the PHA. If the owner corrects the deficiencies within the required cure period, the PHA makes the housing assistance payments
 retroactive to the effective date of the HAP contract.
 (6) The PHA establishes in the Administrative Plan:
 (i) The maximum amount of time it will withhold payments if the owner fails to correct the deficiencies within the required cure period before
 abating payments; and
 (ii) The number of days after which the PHA will terminate the HAP contract for the owner's failure to correct the deficiencies, which may not
 exceed 180 days from the effective date of the HAP contract.
 (7) The owner may not terminate the tenancy of the family due to the withholding or abatement of assistance under this paragraph (f). During the
 period that assistance is abated, the family may terminate the tenancy by notifying the owner and the PHA. If the family chooses to terminate the
 tenancy, the HAP contract will automatically terminate on the effective date of the tenancy termination or the date the family vacates the unit,
 whichever is earlier. The PHA must promptly issue the family its voucher to move.
 (g) Records retention. As with all other inspection reports, and as required by § 982.158(f)(4), reports for inspections conducted pursuant to an
 alternative inspection method must be obtained by the PHA. Such reports must be available for HUD inspection for at least three years from the
 date of the latest inspection.
 [60 FR 34695, July 3, 1995, as amended at 64 FR 26647, May 14, 1999; 64 FR 56914, Oct. 21, 1999; 81 FR 12375, Mar. 8, 2016; 88 FR 30503,
 May 11, 2023; 89 FR 38298, May 7, 2024; 90 FR 56687, Dec. 8, 2025]

 § 982.407 Enforcement of HQS.
 Part 982 does not create any right of the family, or any party other than HUD or the PHA, to require enforcement of the HQS requirements by
 HUD or the PHA, or to assert any claim against HUD or the PHA, for damages, injunction or other relief, for alleged failure to enforce the HQS.

 (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2577-0169)
 [60 FR 34695, July 3, 1995, as amended at 60 FR 45661, Sept. 1, 1995; 80 FR 8246, Feb. 17, 2015. Redesignated at 81 FR 12375, Mar. 8, 2016]

 Subpart J—Housing Assistance Payments Contract and Owner Responsibility
 Source: 60 FR 34695, July 3, 1995, unless otherwise noted.

 § 982.451 Housing assistance payments contract.
 (a) Form and term. (1) The HAP contract must be in the form required by HUD.
 (2) The term of the HAP contract is the same as the term of the lease.
 (b) Housing assistance payment amount. (1) The amount of the monthly housing assistance payment by the PHA to the owner is determined by
 the PHA in accordance with HUD regulations and other requirements. The amount of the housing assistance payment is subject to change during
 the HAP contract term.
 (2) The monthly housing assistance payment by the PHA is credited toward the monthly rent to owner under the family's lease.
 (3) The total of rent paid by the tenant plus the PHA housing assistance payment to the owner may not be more than the rent to owner. The owner
 must immediately return any excess payment to the PHA.
 (4)(i) The part of the rent to owner that is paid by the tenant may not be more than:
 (A) The rent to owner; minus
 (B) The PHA housing assistance payment to the owner.
 (ii) The owner may not demand or accept any rent payment from the tenant in excess of this maximum, and must immediately return any excess
 rent payment to the tenant.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                         Page 40
 (iii) The family is not responsible for payment of the portion of rent to owner covered by the housing assistance payment under the HAP contract
 between the owner and the PHA. See § 982.310(b).
 (5)(i) The PHA must pay the housing assistance payment promptly when due to the owner in accordance with the HAP contract.
 (ii)(A) The HAP contract shall provide for penalties against the PHA for late payment of housing assistance payments due to the owner if all the
 following circumstances apply:
 ( 1 ) Such penalties are in accordance with generally accepted practices and law, as applicable in the local housing market, governing penalties
 for late payment of rent by a tenant;
 ( 2 ) It is the owner's practice to charge such penalties for assisted and unassisted tenants; and
 ( 3 ) The owner also charges such penalties against the tenant for late payment of family rent to owner.
 (B) The PHA is not obligated to pay any late payment penalty if HUD determines that late payment by the PHA is due to factors beyond the
 PHA's control. The PHA may add HAP contract provisions which define when the housing assistance payment by the PHA is deemed received
 by the owner ( e.g., upon mailing by the PHA or actual receipt by the owner).
 (iii) The PHA may only use the following sources to pay a late payment penalty from program receipts under the consolidated ACC:
 administrative fee income for the program, or the administrative fee reserve for the program. The PHA may not use other program receipts for
 this purpose.
 [60 FR 34695, July 3, 1995, as amended at 61 FR 27163, May 30, 1996; 63 FR 23861, Apr. 30, 1998; 64 FR 26647, May 14, 1999; 64 FR 56914,
 Oct. 21, 1999; 89 FR 38300, May 7, 2024]

 § 982.452 Owner responsibilities.
 (a) The owner is responsible for performing all of the owner's obligations under the HAP contract and the lease.
 (b) The owner is responsible for:
 (1) Performing all management and rental functions for the assisted unit, including selecting a voucher-holder to lease the unit, and deciding if
 the family is suitable for tenancy of the unit. The fact that an applicant is or has been a victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual
 assault, or stalking is not an appropriate basis for denial of tenancy if the applicant otherwise qualifies for tenancy.
 (2) Maintaining the unit in accordance with HQS, including performance of ordinary and extraordinary maintenance. For provisions on family
 maintenance responsibilities, see § 982.404(a)(4).
 (3) Complying with equal opportunity requirements.
 (4) Preparing and furnishing to the PHA information required under the HAP contract.
 (5) Collecting from the family:
 (i) Any security deposit.
 (ii) The tenant contribution (the part of rent to owner not covered by the housing assistance payment).
 (iii) Any charges for unit damage by the family.
 (6) Enforcing tenant obligations under the lease.
 (7) Paying for utilities and services (unless paid by the family under the lease).
 (c) For provisions on modifications to a dwelling unit occupied or to be occupied by a disabled person, see 24 CFR 100.203.

 (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2577-0169)
 [60 FR 34695, July 3, 1995, as amended at 60 FR 45661, Sept. 1, 1995; 63 FR 23861, Apr. 30, 1998; 64 FR 26647, May 14, 1999; 73 FR 72345,
 Nov. 28, 2008; 75 FR 66264, Oct. 27, 2010; 80 FR 8246, Feb. 17, 2015; 81 FR 80817, Nov. 16, 2016]

 § 982.453 Owner breach of contract.
 (a) Any of the following actions by the owner (including a principal or other interested party) is a breach of the HAP contract by the owner:
 (1) If the owner has violated any obligation under the HAP contract for the dwelling unit, including the owner's obligation to maintain the unit in
 accordance with the HQS.
 (2) If the owner has violated any obligation under any other HAP contract under Section 8 of the 1937 Act (42 U.S.C. 1437f).
 (3) If the owner has committed fraud, bribery or any other corrupt or criminal act in connection with any federal housing program.
 (4) For projects with mortgages insured by HUD or loans made by HUD, if the owner has failed to comply with the regulations for the applicable



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                          Page 41
 mortgage insurance or loan program, with the mortgage or mortgage note, or with the regulatory agreement; or if the owner has committed fraud,
 bribery or any other corrupt or criminal act in connection with the mortgage or loan.
 (5) If the owner has engaged in drug-related criminal activity.
 (6) If the owner has committed any violent criminal activity.
 (b) The PHA rights and remedies against the owner under the HAP contract include recovery of overpayments, abatement or other reduction of
 housing assistance payments, termination of housing assistance payments, and termination of the HAP contract.
 [60 FR 34695, July 3, 1995, as amended at 64 FR 26647, May 14, 1999; 64 FR 56914, Oct. 21, 1999; 65 FR 16821, Mar. 30, 2000]

 § 982.454 Termination of HAP contract: Insufficient funding.
 The PHA may terminate the HAP contract if the PHA determines, in accordance with HUD requirements, that funding under the consolidated
 ACC is insufficient to support continued assistance for families in the program.
 [60 FR 34695, July 3, 1995, as amended at 64 FR 26647, May 14, 1999]

 § 982.455 Automatic termination of HAP contract.
 The HAP contract terminates automatically 180 calendar days after the last housing assistance payment to the owner.
 [64 FR 26647, May 14, 1999]

 § 982.456 Third parties.
 (a) Even if the family continues to occupy the unit, the PHA may exercise any rights and remedies against the owner under the HAP contract.
 (b)(1) The family is not a party to or third party beneficiary of the HAP contract. Except as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, the family
 may not exercise any right or remedy against the owner under the HAP contract.
 (2) The tenant may exercise any right or remedy against the owner under the lease between the tenant and the owner, including enforcement of
 the owner's obligations under the tenancy addendum (which is included both in the HAP contract between the PHA and the owner; and in the
 lease between the tenant and the owner.)
 (c) The HAP contract shall not be construed as creating any right of the family or other third party (other than HUD) to enforce any provision of
 the HAP contract, or to assert any claim against HUD, the PHA or the owner under the HAP contract.
 [60 FR 34695, July 3, 1995, as amended at 64 FR 26647, May 14, 1999]

 Subpart K—Rent and Housing Assistance Payment
 Source: 63 FR 23861, Apr. 30, 1998, unless otherwise noted.

 § 982.501 Overview.
 This subpart describes program requirements concerning the housing assistance payment and rent to owner under the HCV program.
 [80 FR 8246, Feb. 17, 2015]

 § 982.503 Payment standard areas, schedule, and amounts.
 (a) Payment standard areas. (1) Annually, HUD publishes fair market rents (FMRs) for U.S. Postal Service ZIP code areas, metropolitan areas,
 and nonmetropolitan counties (see 24 CFR 888.113). Within each of these FMR areas, the applicable FMR is:
 (i) The HUD-published Small Area FMR for:
 (A) Any metropolitan area designated as a Small Area FMR area by HUD in accordance with 24 CFR 888.113(c)(1).
 (B) Any area where a PHA has notified HUD that the PHA will voluntarily use SAFMRs in accordance with 24 CFR 888.113(c)(3).
 (ii) The HUD-published metropolitan FMR for any other metropolitan area.
 (iii) The HUD-published FMR for any other non-metropolitan county.
 (2) The PHA must adopt a payment standard schedule that establishes voucher payment standard amounts for each FMR area in the PHA
 jurisdiction. These payment standard amounts are used to calculate the monthly housing assistance payment for a family (§ 982.505).
 (3) The PHA may designate payment standard areas within each FMR area. The PHA may establish different payment standard amounts for such
 designated areas. If the PHA designates payment standard areas, then it must include in its Administrative Plan the criteria used to determine the
 designated areas and the payment standard amounts for those areas.
 (i) The PHA may designate payment standard areas within which payment standards will be established according to paragraph (c) (basic range)


GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                            Page 42
 or paragraph (d) (exception payment standard), of this section.
 (ii) A PHA-designated payment standard area may be no smaller than a census tract block group.
 (b) Payment standard schedule. For each payment standard area, the PHA must establish a payment standard amount for each unit size, measured
 by number of bedrooms (zero-bedroom, one-bedroom, and so on). These payment standard amounts comprise the PHA's payment standard
 schedule.
 (c) Basic range payment standard amounts. A basic range payment standard amount is any dollar amount that is in the range from 90 percent up
 to 110 percent of the published FMR for a unit size.
 (1) The PHA may establish a payment standard amount within the basic range without HUD approval or prior notification to HUD.
 (2) The PHA's basic range payment standard amount for each unit size may be based on the same percentage of the published FMR ( i.e., all
 payment standard amounts may be set at 100 percent of the FMR), or the PHA may establish different payment standard amounts for different
 unit sizes (for example, 90 percent for efficiencies, 100 percent for 1-bedroom units, 110 percent for larger units).
 (3) The PHA must revise its payment standard amounts and schedule no later than 3 months following the effective date of the published FMR if
 revisions are necessary to stay within the basic range.
 (d) Exception payment standard amounts. An exception payment standard amount is a dollar amount that exceeds 110 percent of the published
 FMR.
 (1) The PHA may establish exception payment standard amounts for all units, or for units of a particular size. The exception payment standard
 may be established for a designated part of the FMR area (called an “exception area”) or for the entire FMR area. The exception area must meet
 the minimum area requirement at § 982.503(a)(3)(ii).
 (2) A PHA that is not in a designated Small Area FMR area or has not opted voluntarily to implement Small Area FMRs under 24 CFR
 888.113(c)(3) may establish exception payment standards for a ZIP code area that exceed the basic range for the metropolitan area or county
 FMR as long as the amounts established by the PHA do not exceed 110 percent of the HUD published SAFMR for the applicable ZIP code. The
 exception payment standard must apply to the entire ZIP code area. If an exception area crosses one or more FMR boundaries, then the maximum
 exception payment standard amount that a PHA may adopt for the exception area without HUD approval is 110 percent of the ZIP code area with
 the lowest SAFMR amount. If the PHA qualifies for an exception payment standard above 110 percent of the applicable FMR under paragraph
 (d)(3) or (4) of this section, it may establish exception payment standards up to the same percentage of the SAFMR for the applicable ZIP code.
 (3) A PHA may establish exception payment standard amounts between 110 percent and 120 percent of the applicable FMR for such duration as
 HUD specifies by notice upon notification to HUD that the PHA meets at least one of the following criteria:
 (i) Fewer than 75 percent of the families to whom the PHA issued tenant-based rental vouchers during the most recent 12-month period for which
 there is success rate data available have become participants in the voucher program;
 (ii) More than 40 percent of families with tenant-based rental assistance administered by the agency pay more than 30 percent of adjusted income
 as the family share; or
 (iii) Such other criteria as the Secretary establishes by notice.
 (4) Except as provided in paragraphs (d)(2), (3), and (5) of this section, the PHA must request approval from HUD to establish an exception
 payment standard amount that exceeds 110 percent of the applicable FMR. In its request to HUD, the PHA must provide rental market data
 demonstrating that the requested exception payment standard amount is needed for families to access rental units. The rental market data must
 include a rent estimate for the entire FMR area compared with a rent estimate for the proposed exception area. To apply the exception payment
 standard to the entire FMR area, the rental market data provided by the PHA must also provide data that demonstrates that the annual percentage
 of rent inflation in the FMR area is greater than the rental inflation adjustment factor in the calculation of the published FMR. Once HUD has
 approved the exception payment standard for the requesting PHA, any other PHA with jurisdiction in the HUD approved exception payment
 standard area may also use the exception payment standard amount.
 (5) If required as a reasonable accommodation in accordance with 24 CFR part 8 for a person with a disability, the PHA may establish, without
 HUD approval or prior notification to HUD, an exception payment standard amount for an individual family that does not exceed 120 percent of
 the applicable FMR. A PHA may establish a payment standard greater than 120 percent of the applicable FMR as a reasonable accommodation
 for a person with a disability in accordance with 24 CFR part 8, after requesting and receiving HUD approval.
 (e) Payment standard amount below 90 percent of the applicable FMR. HUD may consider a PHA request for approval to establish a payment
 standard amount that is lower than the basic range. At HUD's sole discretion, HUD may approve PHA establishment of a payment standard lower
 than the basic range. In determining whether to approve the PHA request, HUD will consider appropriate factors, including rent burden of
 families assisted under the program. Unless it is necessary to prevent termination of program participants, HUD will not approve a lower payment
 standard if the proposed payment standard would, if it were used to calculate the housing assistance payments for current participants in the
 PHA's voucher program using currently available data, cause the family share for more than 40 percent of participants with tenant-based rental
 assistance to exceed 30 percent of adjusted monthly income.
 (f) Phaseout of success rate payment standard amounts. HUD will no longer approve success rate payment standards. However, a PHA that was



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                      Page 43
 approved to establish a success rate payment standard amount under this paragraph as in effect prior to June 6, 2024 shall not be required to
 reduce such payment standard amount as a result of the discontinuance of success rate payment standards.
 (g) Payment standard protection for PHAs that meet deconcentration objectives. This paragraph applies only to a PHA with jurisdiction in an
 FMR area where the FMR had previously been set at the 50th percentile rent to provide a broad range of housing opportunities throughout a
 metropolitan area, pursuant to 24 CFR 888.113(i)(3), but is now set at the 40th percentile rent.
 (1) Such a PHA may obtain HUD Field Office approval of a payment standard amount based on the 50th percentile rent if the PHA scored the
 maximum number of points on the deconcentration bonus indicator in 24 CFR 985.3(h) in the prior year, or in two of the last three years.
 (2) HUD approval of payment standard amounts based on the 50th percentile rent shall be for all unit sizes in the FMR area that had previously
 been set at the 50th percentile rent pursuant to 24 CFR 888.113(i)(3). A PHA may opt to establish a payment standard amount based on the 50th
 percentile rent for one or more unit sizes in all or a designated part of the PHA jurisdiction within the FMR area.
 (h) HUD review of PHA payment standard schedules. (1) HUD will monitor rent burdens of families assisted with tenant-based rental assistance
 in a PHA's voucher program. HUD will review the PHA's payment standard for a particular unit size if HUD finds that 40 percent or more of
 such families occupying units of that unit size currently pay more than 30 percent of adjusted monthly income as the family share. Such
 determination may be based on the most recent examinations of family income.
 (2) After such review, HUD may, at its discretion, require the PHA to modify payment standard amounts for any unit size on the PHA payment
 standard schedule. HUD may require the PHA to establish an increased payment standard amount within the basic range.
 [89 FR 38300, May 7, 2024]

 § 982.504 Payment standard for family in restructured subsidized multifamily project.
 (a) This section applies to HCV assistance if all the following conditions are applicable:
 (1) Such HCV assistance is provided to a family pursuant to 24 CFR 401.421 when HUD has approved a restructuring plan, and the participating
 administrative entity has approved the use of tenant-based assistance to provide continued assistance for such families. Such tenant-based
 voucher assistance is provided for a family previously receiving project-based assistance in an eligible project (as defined in § 401.2 of this title)
 at the time when the project-based assistance terminates.
 (2) The family chooses to remain in the restructured project with HCV assistance under the program and leases a unit that does not exceed the
 family unit size;
 (3) The lease for such assisted tenancy commences during the first year after the project-based assistance terminates.
 (b) The initial payment standard for the family under such initial lease is the sum of the reasonable rent to owner for the unit plus the utility
 allowance for tenant-paid utilities. (Determination of such initial payment standard for the family is not subject to paragraphs (c)(1) and (c)(2) of
 § 982.505. Except for determination of the initial payment standard as specifically provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the payment standard
 and housing assistance payment for the family during the HAP contract term shall be determined in accordance with § 982.505.)
 [64 FR 26649, May 14, 1999, as amended at 80 FR 8247, Feb. 17, 2015]

 § 982.505 How to calculate housing assistance payment.
 (a) Use of payment standard. A payment standard is used to calculate the monthly housing assistance payment for a family. The “payment
 standard” is the maximum monthly subsidy payment.
 (b) Amount of monthly housing assistance payment. The PHA shall pay a monthly housing assistance payment on behalf of the family that is
 equal to the lower of:
 (1) The payment standard for the family minus the total tenant payment; or
 (2) The gross rent minus the total tenant payment.
 (c) Payment standard for family—(1) Applying the payment standard. The payment standard for the family is the lower of:
 (i) The payment standard amount for the family unit size; or
 (ii) The payment standard amount for the size of the dwelling unit rented by the family.
 (2) Separate payment standards. If the PHA has established a separate payment standard amount for a designated part of an FMR area in
 accordance with § 982.503 (including an exception payment standard amount as determined in accordance with § 982.503(d)), and the dwelling
 unit is located in such designated part, the PHA must use the appropriate payment standard amount for such designated part to calculate the
 payment standard for the family.
 (3) Decrease in the payment standard amount during the HAP contract term. The PHA may choose not to reduce the payment standard amount
 used to calculate the subsidy for a family for as long as the family continues to reside in the unit for which the family is receiving assistance.
 (i) If the PHA chooses to reduce the payment standard amount used to calculate such a family's subsidy in accordance with its Administrative



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                            Page 44
 Plan, then the initial reduction to the family's payment standard amount may not be applied any earlier than two years following the effective date
 of the decrease in the payment standard, and then only if the family has received the notice required under paragraph (c)(3)(iii) of this section.
 (ii) The PHA may choose to reduce the payment standard amount for the family to the current payment standard amount in effect on the PHA
 voucher payment standard schedule, or it may reduce the payment standard amount to an amount that is higher than the normally applicable
 payment standard amount on the PHA voucher payment standard schedule. After an initial reduction, the PHA may further reduce the payment
 standard amount for the family during the time the family resides in the unit, provided any subsequent reductions continue to result in a payment
 standard amount that meets or exceeds the normally applicable payment standard amount on the PHA voucher payment standard schedule.
 (iii) The PHA must provide the family with at least 12 months' written notice of any reduction in the payment standard amount that will affect the
 family if the family remains in place. In the written notice, the PHA must state the new payment standard amount, explain that the family's new
 payment standard amount will be the greater of the amount listed in the current written notice or the new amount (if any) on the PHA's payment
 standard schedule at the end of the 12-month period, and make clear where the family will find the PHA's payment standard schedule.
 (iv) The PHA must administer decreases in the payment standard amount for the family in accordance with the PHA policy as described in the
 PHA Administrative Plan.
 (4) Increase in the payment standard amount during the HAP contract term. If the payment standard amount is increased during the term of the
 HAP contract, the PHA must use the increased payment standard amount to calculate the monthly housing assistance payment for the family
 beginning no later than the earliest of:
 (i) The effective date of an increase in the gross rent that would result in an increase in the family share;
 (ii) The family's first regular or interim reexamination; or
 (iii) One year following the effective date of the increase in the payment standard amount.
 (5) PHA policy on payment standard increases. The PHA may adopt a policy to apply a payment standard increase at any time earlier than the
 date calculated according to paragraph (c)(4).
 (6) Changes in family unit size during the HAP contract term. Irrespective of any increase or decrease in the payment standard amount, if the
 family unit size either increases or decreases during the HAP contract term, the new family unit size may be used to determine the payment
 standard amount for the family immediately but no later than the family's first regular reexamination following the change in family unit size.
 [64 FR 26649, May 14, 1999, as amended at 64 FR 56914, Oct. 21, 1999; 65 FR 16822, Mar. 30, 2000; 65 FR 42509, July 10, 2000; 66 FR
 30568, June 6, 2001; 67 FR 56689, Sept. 4, 2002; 80 FR 8247, Feb. 17, 2014; 81 FR 12376, Mar. 8, 2016; 81 FR 80582, Nov. 16, 2016; 89 FR
 38302, May 7, 2024]

 § 982.506 Negotiating rent to owner.
 The owner and the family negotiate the rent to owner. At the family's request, the PHA must help the family negotiate the rent to owner.
 [63 FR 23861, Apr. 30, 1998. Redesignated at 64 FR 26648, May 14, 1999]

 § 982.507 Rent to owner: Reasonable rent.
 (a) PHA determination. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, the PHA may not approve a lease until the PHA determines that
 the initial rent to owner is a reasonable rent.
 (2) The PHA must redetermine the reasonable rent:
 (i) Before any increase in the rent to owner;
 (ii) If there is a 10 percent decrease in the published FMR in effect 60 days before the contract anniversary (for the unit size rented by the family)
 as compared with the FMR in effect 1 year before the contract anniversary.
 (iii) If directed by HUD.
 (3) The PHA may also redetermine the reasonable rent at any other time.
 (4) At all times during the assisted tenancy, the rent to owner may not exceed the reasonable rent as most recently determined or redetermined by
 the PHA.
 (b) Comparability. The PHA must determine whether the rent to owner is a reasonable rent in comparison to rent for other comparable unassisted
 units. To make this determination, the PHA must consider:
 (1) The location, quality, size, unit type, and age of the contract unit; and
 (2) Any amenities, housing services, maintenance and utilities to be provided by the owner in accordance with the lease.
 (c) Units assisted by low-income housing tax credits or assistance under HUD's HOME Investment Partnerships (HOME) program. (1) General.
 For a unit receiving low-income housing tax credits (LIHTCs) pursuant to section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or receiving



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                            Page 45
 assistance under HUD's HOME Program (for which the regulations are found in 24 CFR part 92), a rent comparison with unassisted units is not
 required if the voucher rent does not exceed the rent for other LIHTC- or HOME-assisted units in the project that are not occupied by families
 with tenant-based assistance.
 (2) LIHTC. If the rent requested by the owner exceeds the LIHTC rents for non-voucher families, the PHA must determine the rent to owner is a
 reasonable rent in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section and the rent shall not exceed the lesser of the:
 (i) Reasonable rent; and
 (ii) The payment standard established by the PHA for the unit size involved.
 (3) HOME program. If the rent requested by the owner exceeds the HOME rents for non-voucher families, the PHA must determine the rent to
 owner is a reasonable rent in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section and the rent shall not exceed the lesser of the:
 (i) Reasonable rent; and
 (ii) The payment standard established by the PHA for the unit size involved.
 (d) Owner certification of rents charged for other units. By accepting each monthly housing assistance payment from the PHA, the owner certifies
 that the rent to owner is not more than rent charged by the owner for comparable unassisted units in the premises. The owner must give the PHA
 information requested by the PHA on rents charged by the owner for other units in the premises or elsewhere.
 [63 FR 23861, Apr. 30, 1998. Redesignated at 64 FR 26648, May 14, 1999; 79 FR 36164, June 25, 2014; 81 FR 80583, Nov. 16, 2016; 90 FR
 894, Jan. 6, 2025; 90 FR 8780, Feb. 3, 2025]

 § 982.508 Maximum family share at initial occupancy.
 At the time the PHA approves a tenancy for initial occupancy of a dwelling unit by a family with tenant-based assistance under the program, and
 where the gross rent of the unit exceeds the applicable payment standard for the family, the family share must not exceed 40 percent of the
 family's adjusted monthly income. The determination of adjusted monthly income must be based on verification information received by the
 PHA no earlier than 60 days before the PHA issues a voucher to the family.
 [64 FR 59622, Nov. 3, 1999]

 § 982.509 Rent to owner: Effect of rent control.
 In addition to the rent reasonableness limit under this subpart, the amount of rent to owner also may be subject to rent control limits under State or
 local law.
 [63 FR 23861, Apr. 30, 1998. Redesignated and amended at 64 FR 26648, May 14, 1999]

 § 982.510 Other fees and charges.
 (a) The cost of meals or supportive services may not be included in the rent to owner, and the value of meals or supportive services may not be
 included in the calculation of reasonable rent.
 (b) The lease may not require the tenant or family members to pay charges for meals or supportive services. Non-payment of such charges is not
 grounds for termination of tenancy.
 (c) The owner may not charge the tenant extra amounts for items customarily included in rent in the locality, or provided at no additional cost to
 unsubsidized tenants in the premises.
 [63 FR 23861, Apr. 30, 1998. Redesignated at 64 FR 26648, May 14, 1999]

 § 982.514 Distribution of housing assistance payment.
 The monthly housing assistance payment is distributed as follows:
 (a) The PHA pays the owner the lesser of the housing assistance payment or the rent to owner.
 (b) If the housing assistance payment exceeds the rent to owner, the PHA may pay the balance of the housing assistance payment (“utility
 reimbursement”) either to the family or directly to the utility supplier to pay the utility bill on behalf of the family. If the PHA elects to pay the
 utility supplier directly, the PHA must notify the family of the amount paid to the utility supplier.
 (c) The PHA may elect to establish policies regarding the frequency of utility reimbursement payments for payments made to the family.
 (1) The PHA will have the option of making utility reimbursement payments not less than once per calendar-year quarter, for reimbursements
 totaling $45 or less per quarter. In the event a family leaves the program in advance of its next quarterly reimbursement, the PHA would be
 required to reimburse the family for a prorated share of the applicable reimbursement. PHAs exercising this option must have a hardship policy in
 place for tenants.
 (2) If the PHA elects to pay the utility supplier directly, the PHA must notify the family of the amount paid to the utility supplier.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                               Page 46
 [63 FR 23861, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 64 FR 56914, Oct. 21, 1999; 65 FR 16822, Mar. 30, 2000; 81 FR 12376, Mar. 8, 2016]

 § 982.515 Family share: Family responsibility.
 (a) The family share is calculated by subtracting the amount of the housing assistance payment from the gross rent.
 (b) The family rent to owner is calculated by subtracting the amount of the housing assistance payment to the owner from the rent to owner.
 (c) The PHA may not use housing assistance payments or other program funds (including any administrative fee reserve) to pay any part of the
 family share, including the family rent to owner. Payment of the whole family share is the responsibility of the family.
 [63 FR 23861, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 64 FR 56915, Oct. 21, 1999]

 § 982.516 Family income and composition: Annual and interim examinations.
 (a) PHA responsibility for reexamination and verification. (1) The PHA must conduct a reexamination of family income and composition at least
 annually.
 (2) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, the PHA must obtain and document in the tenant file third-party verification of the
 following factors, or must document in the tenant file why third-party verification was not available:
 (i) Reported family annual income;
 (ii) The value of assets;
 (iii) Expenses related to deductions from annual income; and
 (iv) Other factors that affect the determination of adjusted income.
 (3) For a family with net family assets (as the term is defined in § 5.603 of this title) equal to or less than $50,000, which amount will be adjusted
 annually by HUD in accordance with the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, a PHA may accept, for purposes
 of recertification of income, a family's declaration under § 5.618(b) of this title, except that the PHA must obtain third-party verification of all
 family assets every 3 years.
 (b) Streamlined income determination —(1) General. A PHA may elect to apply a streamlined income determination to families receiving fixed
 income as described in paragraph (b)(3) of this section.
 (2) Definition of “fixed income”. For purposes of this section, “fixed income” means periodic payments at reasonably predictable levels from one
 or more of the following sources:
 (i) Social Security, Supplemental Security Income, Supplemental Disability Insurance.
 (ii) Federal, state, local, or private pension plans.
 (iii) Annuities or other retirement benefit programs, insurance policies, disability or death benefits, or other similar types of periodic receipts.
 (iv) Any other source of income subject to adjustment by a verifiable COLA or current rate of interest.
 (3) Method of streamlined income determination. A PHA using the streamlined income determination must adjust a family's income according to
 the percentage of a family's unadjusted income that is from fixed income.
 (i) When 90 percent or more of a family's unadjusted income consists of fixed income, PHAs using streamlined income determinations must
 apply a COLA or COLAs to the family's fixed-income sources, provided that the family certifies both that 90 percent or more of their unadjusted
 income is fixed income and that their sources of fixed income have not changed from the previous year. For non-fixed income, the PHA is not
 required to make adjustments pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section.
 (ii) When less than 90 percent of a family's unadjusted income consists of fixed income, PHAs using streamlined income determinations must
 apply a COLA to each of the family's sources of fixed income individually. The PHA must determine all other income pursuant to paragraph (a)
 of this section.
 (4) COLA rate applied by PHAs. PHAs using streamlined income determinations must adjust a family's fixed income using a COLA or current
 interest rate that applies to each specific source of fixed income and is available from a public source or through tenant-provided,
 third-party-generated documentation. If no public verification or tenant-provided documentation is available, then the owner must obtain
 third-party verification of the income amounts in order to calculate the change in income for the source.
 (5) Triennial verification. For any income determined pursuant to a streamlined income determination, a PHA must obtain third-party verification
 of all income amounts every 3 years.
 (c) Interim reexaminations. (1) A family may request an interim determination of family income or composition because of any changes since the
 last determination. The PHA must conduct any interim reexamination within a reasonable period of time after the family request or when the
 PHA becomes aware of an increase in family adjusted income under paragraph (c)(3) of this section. What qualifies as a “reasonable time” may
 vary based on the amount of time it takes to verify information, but generally should not be longer than 30 days after changes in income are



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 47
 reported.
 (2) The PHA may decline to conduct an interim reexamination of family income if the PHA estimates the family's adjusted income will decrease
 by an amount that is less than ten percent of the family's annual adjusted income (or a lower amount established by HUD through notice), or a
 lower threshold established by the PHA.
 (3) The PHA must conduct an interim reexamination of family income when the PHA becomes aware that the family's adjusted income (as
 defined in § 5.611 of this title) has changed by an amount that the PHA estimates will result in an increase of ten percent or more in annual
 adjusted income or such other amount established by HUD through notice, except:
 (i) The PHA may not consider any increase in the earned income of the family when estimating or calculating whether the family's adjusted
 income has increased, unless the family has previously received an interim reduction under paragraph (c)(1) of this section during the
 certification period; and
 (ii) The PHA may choose not to conduct an interim reexamination in the last three months of a certification period.
 (4) Effective date of rent changes. (i) If the family has reported a change in family income or composition in a timely manner according to the
 PHA's policies, the PHA must provide the family with 30 days advance notice of any family share and family rent to owner increases, and such
 increases will be effective the first day of the month beginning after the end of that 30-day period. Family share and family rent to owner
 decreases will be effective on the first day of the first month after the date of the reported change leading to the interim reexamination of family
 income.
 (ii) If the family has failed to report a change in family income or composition in a timely manner according to the PHA's policies, PHAs must
 implement any resulting family share and family rent to owner increases retroactively to the first of the month following the date of the change
 leading to the interim reexamination of family income. Any resulting family share and family rent to owner decrease must be implemented no
 later than the first rent period following completion of the reexamination. However, a PHA may apply a family share and family rent to owner
 decrease retroactively at the discretion of the PHA, in accordance with the conditions established by the PHA in the Administrative Plan and
 subject to paragraph (c)(4)(iii) of this section.
 (iii) A retroactive family share and family rent to owner decrease may not be applied prior to the later of the first of the month following:
 (A) The date of the change leading to the interim reexamination of family income; or
 (B) The effective date of the family's most recent previous interim or annual reexamination (or initial examination if that was the family's last
 examination).
 (d) Family reporting of change. The PHA must adopt policies consistent with this section prescribing when and under what conditions the family
 must report a change in family income or composition.
 (e) Effective date of reexamination. (1) The PHA must adopt policies consistent with this section prescribing how to determine the effective date
 of a change in the housing assistance payment resulting from an interim redetermination.
 (2) At the effective date of a regular or interim reexamination, the PHA must make appropriate adjustments in the housing assistance payment in
 accordance with § 982.505.
 (f) Accuracy of family income data. The PHA must establish procedures that are appropriate and necessary to assure that income data provided
 by applicant or participant families is complete and accurate. The PHA will not be considered out of compliance with the requirements in this
 section solely due to de minimis errors in calculating family income but is still obligated to correct errors once the PHA becomes aware of the
 errors. A de minimis error is an error where the PHA determination of family income deviates from the correct income determination by no more
 than $30 per month in monthly adjusted income ($360 in annual adjusted income).
 (1) The PHA must take any corrective action necessary to credit or repay a family if the family has been overcharged for their rent or family share
 as a result of an error (including a de minimis error) in the income determination. Families will not be required to repay the PHA in instances
 where the PHA has miscalculated income resulting in a family being undercharged for rent or family share.
 (2) HUD may revise the amount of de minimis error in this paragraph (f) through a rulemaking published in the Federal Register for public
 comment.
 (g) Execution of release and consent. (1) As a condition of admission to or continued assistance under the program, the PHA shall require the
 family head, and such other family members as the PHA designates, to execute a HUD-approved release and consent form (including any release
 and consent as required under § 5.230 of this title) authorizing any depository or private source of income, or any Federal, State or local agency,
 to furnish or release to the PHA or HUD such information as the PHA or HUD determines to be necessary.
 (2) The PHA and HUD must limit the use or disclosure of information obtained from a family or from another source pursuant to this release and
 consent to purposes directly in connection with administration of the program.
 (h) Reviews of family income under this section are subject to the provisions in section 904 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance
 Amendments Act of 1988, as amended (42 U.S.C. 3544).




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 48
 (Information collection requirements contained in this section have been approved by the Office of Management
 and Budget under control number 2577-0169.)
 [63 FR 23861, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 64 FR 13057, Mar. 16, 1999; 64 FR 26649, May 14, 1999; 64 FR 56915, Oct. 21, 1999; 65 FR
 16822, Mar. 30, 2000; 80 FR 8247, Feb. 17, 2015; 81 FR 12376, Mar. 8, 2016; 82 FR 58341, Dec. 12, 2017; 85 FR 27139, May 7, 2020; 88 FR
 9675, Feb. 14, 2023; 90 FR 56687, Dec. 8, 2025]

 § 982.517 Utility allowance schedule.
 (a) Maintaining schedule. (1) The PHA must maintain a utility allowance schedule for all tenant-paid utilities (except telephone), for cost of
 tenant-supplied refrigerators and ranges, and for other tenant-paid housing services (e.g., trash collection (disposal of waste and refuse)).
 (2) The PHA must provide a copy of the utility allowance schedule to HUD. At HUD's request, the PHA also must provide any information or
 procedures used in preparation of the schedule.
 (b) How allowances are determined. (1)(i) A PHA's utility allowance schedule, and the utility allowance for an individual family, must include
 the utilities and services that are necessary in the locality to provide housing that complies with HQS. The PHA's utility allowance schedule and
 utility allowance for families must also include any utilities and services required by HUD after publication in the Federal Register for public
 comment.
 (ii) In the utility allowance schedule, the PHA must classify utilities and other housing services according to the following general categories:
 space heating; air conditioning; cooking; water heating; water; sewer; trash collection (disposal of waste and refuse); other electric; refrigerator
 (cost of tenant-supplied refrigerator); range (cost of tenant-supplied range); applicable surcharges; and other specified housing services.
 (iii) The PHA must provide a utility allowance for tenant-paid air-conditioning costs if the majority of housing units in the market provide
 centrally air-conditioned units or there is appropriate wiring for tenant-installed air conditioners.
 (iv) The PHA may not provide any allowance for non-essential utility costs, such as costs of cable or satellite television.
 (2)(i) The PHA must maintain an area-wide utility allowance schedule. The area-wide utility allowance schedule must be determined based on
 the typical cost of utilities and services paid by energy-conservative households that occupy housing of similar size and type in the same locality.
 In developing the schedule, the PHA must use normal patterns of consumption for the community as a whole and current utility rates.
 (ii) The PHA may maintain an area-wide, energy-efficient utility allowance schedule to be used for units that are in a building that meets
 Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) or Energy Star standards. HUD may subsequently identify additional Energy Savings
 Design standards or criteria for applying the allowance to retrofitted units in a building that does not meet the standard, which will be modified or
 added through a document published in the Federal Register for 30 days of public comment, followed by a final document announcing the
 modified standards and the date on which the modifications take effect. The energy-efficient utility allowance (EEUA) schedule is to be
 maintained in addition to, not in place of, the area-wide utility allowance schedule described in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section, unless all units
 within a PHA's jurisdiction meet one or more of the required standards.
 (iii) The PHA may base its utility allowance payments on actual flat fees charged by an owner for utilities that are billed directly by the owner,
 but only if the flat fee charged by the owner is no greater than the PHA's applicable utility allowance for the utilities covered by the fee. If an
 owner charges a flat fee for only some of the utilities, then the PHA must pay a separate allowance for any tenant-paid utilities that are not
 covered in the flat fee.
 (iv) For tenant-based participants residing in units within a project that has an approved project-specific utility allowance under § 983.301(f)(4),
 the PHA must use the project-specific utility allowance schedule (see 24 CFR 983.301(f)(4)).
 (v) The PHA must state its policy for utility allowance payments in its Administrative Plan and apply it consistently to all similarly situated
 households.
 (c) Revisions of utility allowance schedule. (1) A PHA must review its schedule of utility allowances each year, and must revise its allowance for
 a utility category if there has been a change of 10 percent or more in the utility rate since the last time the utility allowance schedule was revised.
 The PHA must maintain information supporting its annual review of utility allowances and any revisions made in its utility allowance schedule.
 (2) At HUD's direction, the PHA must revise the utility allowance schedule to correct any errors, or as necessary to update the schedule.
 (d) Use of utility allowance schedule. The PHA must use the appropriate utility allowance for the lesser of the size of dwelling unit actually
 leased by the family or the family unit size as determined under the PHA subsidy standards. In cases where the unit size leased exceeds the family
 unit size as determined under the PHA subsidy standards as a result of a reasonable accommodation, the PHA must use the appropriate utility
 allowance for the size of the dwelling unit actually leased by the family.
 (e) Higher utility allowance as reasonable accommodation for a person with disabilities. On request from a household that includes a person with
 disabilities, the PHA must approve a utility allowance which is higher than the applicable amount on the utility allowance schedule if a higher
 utility allowance is needed as a reasonable accommodation under 24 CFR part 8, the Fair Housing Act and 24 CFR part 100, or Titles II or III of
 the Americans with Disabilities Act and 28 CFR parts 35 and 36, to make the program accessible to and usable by the household member with a
 disability.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 49
 (Information collection requirements contained in this section have been approved by the Office of Management
 and Budget under control number 2577-0169.)
 [63 FR 23861, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 80 FR 8247, Feb. 17, 2015; 81 FR 12377, Mar. 8, 2016; 89 FR 38302, May 7, 2024]

 § 982.521 Rent to owner in subsidized project.
 (a) Applicability to subsidized project. This section applies to a program tenancy in any of the following types of federally subsidized project:
 (1) An insured or non-insured Section 236 project;
 (2) A Section 202 project;
 (3) A Section 221(d)(3) below market interest rate (BMIR) project; or
 (4) A Section 515 project of the Rural Development Administration.
 (b) How rent to owner is determined. The rent to owner is the subsidized rent as determined in accordance with requirements for the applicable
 federal program listed in paragraph (a) of this section. This determination is not subject to the prohibition against increasing the rent to owner
 during the initial lease term (see § 982.309).
 [65 FR 16822, Mar. 30, 2000, as amended at 80 FR 8247, Feb. 17, 2015]

 Subpart L—Family Obligations; Denial and Termination of Assistance
 Source: 60 FR 34695, July 3, 1995, unless otherwise noted.

 § 982.551 Obligations of participant.
 (a) Purpose. This section states the obligations of a participant family under the program.
 (b) Supplying required information —(1) The family must supply any information that the PHA or HUD determines is necessary in the
 administration of the program, including submission of required evidence of citizenship or eligible immigration status (as provided by 24 CFR
 part 5). “Information” includes any requested certification, release or other documentation.
 (2) The family must supply any information requested by the PHA or HUD for use in a regularly scheduled reexamination or interim
 reexamination of family income and composition in accordance with HUD requirements.
 (3) The family must disclose and verify social security numbers (as provided by part 5, subpart B, of this title) and must sign and submit consent
 forms for obtaining information in accordance with part 5, subpart B, of this title.
 (4) Any information supplied by the family must be true and complete.
 (c) HQS breach caused by family. The family is responsible for an HQS breach caused by the family as described in § 982.404(b).
 (d) Allowing PHA inspection. The family must allow the PHA to inspect the unit at reasonable times and after reasonable notice.
 (e) Violation of lease. The family may not commit any serious or repeated violation of the lease. Under 24 CFR 5.2005(c), an incident or
 incidents of actual or threatened domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking will not be construed as a serious or repeated lease
 violation by the victim, or threatened victim, of the domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, or as good cause to terminate
 the tenancy, occupancy rights, or assistance of the victim.
 (f) Family notice of move or lease termination. The family must notify the PHA and the owner before the family moves out of the unit, or
 terminates the lease on notice to the owner. See § 982.354(d).
 (g) Owner eviction notice. The family must promptly give the PHA a copy of any owner eviction notice.
 (h) Use and occupancy of unit —(1) The family must use the assisted unit for residence by the family. The unit must be the family's only
 residence.
 (2) The composition of the assisted family residing in the unit must be approved by the PHA. The family must promptly inform the PHA of the
 birth, adoption or court-awarded custody of a child. The family must request PHA approval to add any other family member as an occupant of the
 unit. No other person [i.e., nobody but members of the assisted family] may reside in the unit (except for a foster child or live-in aide as provided
 in paragraph (h)(4) of this section).
 (3) The family must promptly notify the PHA if any family member no longer resides in the unit.
 (4) If the PHA has given approval, a foster child or a live-in-aide may reside in the unit. The PHA has the discretion to adopt reasonable policies
 concerning residence by a foster child or a live-in-aide, and defining when PHA consent may be given or denied.
 (5) Members of the household may engage in legal profitmaking activities in the unit, but only if such activities are incidental to primary use of
 the unit for residence by members of the family.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                            Page 50
 (6) The family must not sublease or let the unit.
 (7) The family must not assign the lease or transfer the unit.
 (i) Absence from unit. The family must supply any information or certification requested by the PHA to verify that the family is living in the unit,
 or relating to family absence from the unit, including any PHA-requested information or certification on the purposes of family absences. The
 family must cooperate with the PHA for this purpose. The family must promptly notify the PHA of absence from the unit.
 (j) Interest in unit. The family must not own or have any interest in the unit.
 (k) Fraud and other program violation. The members of the family must not commit fraud, bribery or any other corrupt or criminal act in
 connection with the programs.
 (l) Crime by household members. The members of the household may not engage in drug-related criminal activity or violent criminal activity or
 other criminal activity that threatens the health, safety, or right to peaceful enjoyment of other residents and persons residing in the immediate
 vicinity of the premises (see § 982.553). Under 24 CFR 5.2005(b)(2), criminal activity directly related to domestic violence, dating violence,
 sexual assault, or stalking, engaged in by a member of a tenant's household, or any guest or other person under the tenant's control, shall not be
 cause for termination of tenancy, occupancy rights, or assistance of the victim, if the tenant or an affiliated individual of the tenant, as defined in
 24 CFR 5.2003, is the victim.
 (m) Alcohol abuse by household members. The members of the household must not abuse alcohol in a way that threatens the health, safety or
 right to peaceful enjoyment of other residents and persons residing in the immediate vicinity of the premises.
 (n) Other housing assistance. An assisted family, or members of the family, may not receive Section 8 tenant-based assistance while receiving
 another housing subsidy, for the same unit or for a different unit, under any duplicative (as determined by HUD or in accordance with HUD
 requirements) federal, State or local housing assistance program.

 (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2577-0169)
 [60 FR 34695, July 3, 1995, as amended at 60 FR 45661, Sept. 1, 1995; 61 FR 11119, Mar. 18, 1996; 61 FR 13627, Mar. 27, 1996; 61 FR
 27163, May 30, 1996; 64 FR 26650, May 14, 1999; 66 FR 28805, May 24, 2001; 73 FR 72345, Nov. 28, 2008; 75 FR 66264, Oct. 27, 2010; 80
 FR 50575, Aug. 20, 2015; 81 FR 80817, Nov. 16, 2016]

 § 982.552 PHA denial or termination of assistance for family.
 (a) Action or inaction by family. (1) A PHA may deny assistance for an applicant or terminate assistance for a participant under the programs
 because of the family's action or failure to act as described in this section or § 982.553. The provisions of this section do not affect denial or
 termination of assistance for grounds other than action or failure to act by the family.
 (2) Denial of assistance for an applicant may include any or all of the following: denying listing on the PHA waiting list, denying or withdrawing
 a voucher, refusing to enter into a HAP contract or approve a lease, and refusing to process or provide assistance under portability procedures.
 (3) Termination of assistance for a participant may include any or all of the following: refusing to enter into a HAP contract or approve a lease,
 terminating housing assistance payments under an outstanding HAP contract, and refusing to process or provide assistance under portability
 procedures.
 (4) This section does not limit or affect exercise of the PHA rights and remedies against the owner under the HAP contract, including termination,
 suspension or reduction of housing assistance payments, or termination of the HAP contract.
 (b) Requirement to deny admission or terminate assistance. (1) For provisions on denial of admission and termination of assistance for illegal
 drug use, other criminal activity, and alcohol abuse that would threaten other residents, see § 982.553.
 (2) The PHA must terminate program assistance for a family evicted from housing assisted under the program for serious violation of the lease.
 (3) The PHA must deny admission to the program for an applicant, or terminate program assistance for a participant, if any member of the family
 fails to sign and submit consent forms for obtaining information in accordance with part 5, subparts B and F of this title.
 (4) The family must submit required evidence of citizenship or eligible immigration status. See part 5 of this title for a statement of circumstances
 in which the PHA must deny admission or terminate program assistance because a family member does not establish citizenship or eligible
 immigration status, and the applicable informal hearing procedures.
 (5) The PHA must deny or terminate assistance if any family member fails to meet the eligibility requirements concerning individuals enrolled at
 an institution of higher education as specified in 24 CFR 5.612.
 (6) The PHA must deny or terminate assistance based on the restrictions on net assets and property ownership when required by § 5.618 of this
 title.
 (c) Authority to deny admission or terminate assistance —(1) Grounds for denial or termination of assistance. The PHA may at any time deny
 program assistance for an applicant, or terminate program assistance for a participant, for any of the following grounds:
 (i) If the family violates any family obligations under the program (see § 982.551). See § 982.553 concerning denial or termination of assistance



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 51
 for crime by family members.
 (ii) If any member of the family has been evicted from federally assisted housing in the last five years;
 (iii) If a PHA has ever terminated assistance under the program for any member of the family.
 (iv) If any member of the family has committed fraud, bribery, or any other corrupt or criminal act in connection with any Federal housing
 program (see also § 982.553(a)(1));
 (v) If the family currently owes rent or other amounts to the PHA or to another PHA in connection with Section 8 or public housing assistance
 under the 1937 Act.
 (vi) If the family has not reimbursed any PHA for amounts paid to an owner under a HAP contract for rent, damages to the unit, or other amounts
 owed by the family under the lease.
 (vii) If the family breaches an agreement with the PHA to pay amounts owed to a PHA, or amounts paid to an owner by a PHA. (The PHA, at its
 discretion, may offer a family the opportunity to enter an agreement to pay amounts owed to a PHA or amounts paid to an owner by a PHA. The
 PHA may prescribe the terms of the agreement.)
 (viii) If the family has engaged in or threatened abusive or violent behavior toward PHA personnel.
 (ix) If a welfare-to-work (WTW) family fails, willfully and persistently, to fulfill its obligations under the welfare-to-work voucher program.
 (x) If the family has been engaged in criminal activity or alcohol abuse as described in § 982.553.
 (2) Consideration of circumstances. In determining whether to deny or terminate assistance because of action or failure to act by members of the
 family:
 (i) The PHA may consider all relevant circumstances such as the seriousness of the case, the extent of participation or culpability of individual
 family members, mitigating circumstances related to the disability of a family member, and the effects of denial or termination of assistance on
 other family members who were not involved in the action or failure.
 (ii) The PHA may impose, as a condition of continued assistance for other family members, a requirement that other family members who
 participated in or were culpable for the action or failure will not reside in the unit. The PHA may permit the other members of a participant family
 to continue receiving assistance.
 (iii) In determining whether to deny admission or terminate assistance for illegal use of drugs or alcohol abuse by a household member who is no
 longer engaged in such behavior, the PHA may consider whether such household member is participating in or has successfully completed a
 supervised drug or alcohol rehabilitation program, or has otherwise been rehabilitated successfully (42 U.S.C. 13661). For this purpose, the PHA
 may require the applicant or tenant to submit evidence of the household member's current participation in, or successful completion of, a
 supervised drug or alcohol rehabilitation program or evidence of otherwise having been rehabilitated successfully.
 (iv) If the family includes a person with disabilities, the PHA decision concerning such action is subject to consideration of reasonable
 accommodation in accordance with part 8 of this title.
 (v) Nondiscrimination limitation and protection for victims of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking. The PHA's
 admission and termination actions must be consistent with fair housing and equal opportunity provisions of 24 CFR 5.105, and with the
 requirements of 24 CFR part 5, subpart L (Protection for Victims of Domestic Violence, Dating Violence, Sexual Assault, or Stalking).
 (d) Information for family. The PHA must give the family a written description of:
 (1) Family obligations under the program.
 (2) The grounds on which the PHA may deny or terminate assistance because of family action or failure to act.
 (3) The PHA informal hearing procedures.
 (e) Applicant screening. The PHA may at any time deny program assistance for an applicant in accordance with the PHA policy, as stated in the
 PHA Administrative Plan, on screening of applicants for family behavior or suitability for tenancy.

 (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2577-0169)
 [60 FR 34695, July 3, 1995]

 Editorial Note:
 For Federal Register citations affecting § 982.552, see the List of CFR Sections Affected, which appears in the Finding Aids section of the
 printed volume and at www.govinfo.gov.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                           Page 52
 § 982.553 Denial of admission and termination of assistance for criminals and alcohol abusers.
 (a) Denial of admission —(1) Prohibiting admission of drug criminals. (i) The PHA must prohibit admission to the program of an applicant for
 three years from the date of eviction if a household member has been evicted from federally assisted housing for drug-related criminal activity.
 However, the PHA may admit the household if the PHA determines:
 (A) That the evicted household member who engaged in drug-related criminal activity has successfully completed a supervised drug
 rehabilitation program approved by the PHA; or
 (B) That the circumstances leading to eviction no longer exist (for example, the criminal household member has died or is imprisoned).
 (ii) The PHA must establish standards that prohibit admission if:
 (A) The PHA determines that any household member is currently engaging in illegal use of a drug;
 (B) The PHA determines that it has reasonable cause to believe that a household member's illegal drug use or a pattern of illegal drug use may
 threaten the health, safety, or right to peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents; or
 (C) Any household member has ever been convicted of drug-related criminal activity for manufacture or production of methamphetamine on the
 premises of federally assisted housing.
 (2) Prohibiting admission of other criminals—(i) Mandatory prohibition. The PHA must establish standards that prohibit admission to the
 program if any member of the household is subject to a lifetime registration requirement under a State sex offender registration program. In this
 screening of applicants, the PHA must perform criminal history background checks necessary to determine whether any household member is
 subject to a lifetime sex offender registration requirement in the State where the housing is located and in other States where the household
 members are known to have resided.
 (ii) Permissive prohibitions. (A) The PHA may prohibit admission of a household to the program if the PHA determines that any household
 member is currently engaged in, or has engaged in during a reasonable time before the admission:
 (1) Drug-related criminal activity;
 (2) Violent criminal activity;
 (3) Other criminal activity which may threaten the health, safety, or right to peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents or persons
 residing in the immediate vicinity; or
 (4) Other criminal activity which may threaten the health or safety of the owner, property management staff, or persons performing a contract
 administration function or responsibility on behalf of the PHA (including a PHA employee or a PHA contractor, subcontractor or agent).
 (B) The PHA may establish a period before the admission decision during which an applicant must not have engaged in the activities specified in
 paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this section (“reasonable time”).
 (C) If the PHA previously denied admission to an applicant because a member of the household engaged in criminal activity, the PHA may
 reconsider the applicant if the PHA has sufficient evidence that the members of the household are not currently engaged in, and have not engaged
 in, such criminal activity during a reasonable period, as determined by the PHA, before the admission decision.
 (1) The PHA would have “sufficient evidence” if the household member submitted a certification that she or he is not currently engaged in and
 has not engaged in such criminal activity during the specified period and provided supporting information from such sources as a probation
 officer, a landlord, neighbors, social service agency workers and criminal records, which the PHA verified.
 (2) For purposes of this section, a household member is “currently engaged in” criminal activity if the person has engaged in the behavior
 recently enough to justify a reasonable belief that the behavior is current.
 (3) Prohibiting admission of alcohol abusers. The PHA must establish standards that prohibit admission to the program if the PHA determines
 that it has reasonable cause to believe that a household member's abuse or pattern of abuse of alcohol may threaten the health, safety, or right to
 peaceful enjoyment of the premises by other residents.
 (b) Terminating assistance —(1) Terminating assistance for drug criminals. (i) The PHA must establish standards that allow the PHA to terminate
 assistance for a family under the program if the PHA determines that:
 (A) Any household member is currently engaged in any illegal use of a drug; or
 (B) A pattern of illegal use of a drug by any household member interferes with the health, safety, or right to peaceful enjoyment of the premises
 by other residents.
 (ii) The PHA must immediately terminate assistance for a family under the program if the PHA determines that any member of the household has
 ever been convicted of drug-related criminal activity for manufacture or production of methamphetamine on the premises of federally assisted
 housing.
 (iii) The PHA must establish standards that allow the PHA to terminate assistance under the program for a family if the PHA determines that any
 family member has violated the family's obligation under § 982.551 not to engage in any drug-related criminal activity.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                           Page 53
 (2) Terminating assistance for other criminals. The PHA must establish standards that allow the PHA to terminate assistance under the program
 for a family if the PHA determines that any household member has violated the family's obligation under § 982.551 not to engage in violent
 criminal activity.
 (3) Terminating assistance for alcohol abusers. The PHA must establish standards that allow termination of assistance for a family if the PHA
 determines that a household member's abuse or pattern of abuse of alcohol may threaten the health, safety, or right to peaceful enjoyment of the
 premises by other residents.
 (c) Evidence of criminal activity. The PHA may terminate assistance for criminal activity by a household member as authorized in this section if
 the PHA determines, based on a preponderance of the evidence, that the household member has engaged in the activity, regardless of whether the
 household member has been arrested or convicted for such activity.
 (d) Use of criminal record —(1) Denial. If a PHA proposes to deny admission for criminal activity as shown by a criminal record, the PHA must
 provide the subject of the record and the applicant with a copy of the criminal record. The PHA must give the family an opportunity to dispute the
 accuracy and relevance of that record, in the informal review process in accordance with § 982.554. (See part 5, subpart J for provision
 concerning access to criminal records.)
 (2) Termination of assistance. If a PHA proposes to terminate assistance for criminal activity as shown by a criminal record, the PHA must notify
 the household of the proposed action to be based on the information and must provide the subject of the record and the tenant with a copy of the
 criminal record. The PHA must give the family an opportunity to dispute the accuracy and relevance of that record in accordance with § 982.555.
 (3) Cost of obtaining criminal record. The PHA may not pass along to the tenant the costs of a criminal records check.
 (e) The requirements in 24 CFR part 5, subpart L (Protection for Victims of Domestic Violence, Dating Violence, Sexual Assault, or Stalking)
 apply to this section.
 [66 FR 28805, May 24, 2001, as amended at 73 FR 72345, Nov. 28, 2008; 75 FR 66264, Oct. 27, 2010; 80 FR 8247, Feb. 17, 2015; 81 FR
 80817, Nov. 16, 2016]

 § 982.554 Informal review for applicant.
 (a) Notice to applicant. The PHA must give an applicant for participation prompt notice of a decision denying assistance to the applicant. The
 notice must contain a brief statement of the reasons for the PHA decision. The notice must also state that the applicant may request an informal
 review of the decision and must describe how to obtain the informal review.
 (b) Informal review process. The PHA must give an applicant an opportunity for an informal review of the PHA decision denying assistance to
 the applicant. The Administrative Plan must state the PHA procedures for conducting an informal review. The PHA review procedures must
 comply with the following:
 (1) The review may be conducted by any person or persons designated by the PHA, other than a person who made or approved the decision under
 review or a subordinate of this person.
 (2) The applicant must be given an opportunity to present written or oral objections to the PHA decision.
 (3) The PHA must notify the applicant of the PHA final decision after the informal review, including a brief statement of the reasons for the final
 decision.
 (c) When informal review is not required. The PHA is not required to provide the applicant an opportunity for an informal review for any of the
 following:
 (1) Discretionary administrative determinations by the PHA.
 (2) General policy issues or class grievances.
 (3) A determination of the family unit size under the PHA subsidy standards.
 (4) A PHA determination not to approve an extension of the voucher term.
 (5) A PHA determination not to grant approval of the tenancy.
 (6) An PHA determination that a unit selected by the applicant is not in compliance with HQS.
 (7) An PHA determination that the unit is not in accordance with HQS because of the family size or composition.
 (d) Restrictions on assistance for noncitizens. The informal hearing provisions for the denial of assistance on the basis of ineligible immigration
 status are contained in 24 CFR part 5.

 (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2577-0169)
 [60 FR 34695, July 3, 1995, as amended at 60 FR 45661, Sept. 1, 1995; 61 FR 13627, Mar. 27, 1996; 64 FR 26650, May 14, 1999; 80 FR 50575,
 Aug. 20, 2015]




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                           Page 54
 § 982.555 Informal hearing for participant.
 (a) When hearing is required. (1) A PHA must give a participant family an opportunity for an informal hearing to consider whether the following
 PHA decisions relating to the individual circumstances of a participant family are in accordance with the law, HUD regulations and PHA
 policies:
 (i) A determination of the family's annual or adjusted income, and the use of such income to compute the housing assistance payment.
 (ii) A determination of the appropriate utility allowance (if any) for tenant-paid utilities from the PHA utility allowance schedule.
 (iii) A determination of the family unit size under the PHA subsidy standards.
 (iv) A determination to terminate assistance for a participant family because of the family's action or failure to act (see § 982.552).
 (v) A determination to terminate assistance because the participant family has been absent from the assisted unit for longer than the maximum
 period permitted under PHA policy and HUD rules.
 (2) In the cases described in paragraphs (a)(1) (iv), (v) and (vi) of this section, the PHA must give the opportunity for an informal hearing before
 the PHA terminates housing assistance payments for the family under an outstanding HAP contract.
 (b) When hearing is not required. The PHA is not required to provide a participant family an opportunity for an informal hearing for any of the
 following:
 (1) Discretionary administrative determinations by the PHA.
 (2) General policy issues or class grievances.
 (3) Establishment of the PHA schedule of utility allowances for families in the program.
 (4) A PHA determination not to approve an extension of the voucher term.
 (5) A PHA determination not to approve a unit or tenancy.
 (6) A PHA determination that an assisted unit is not in compliance with HQS. (However, the PHA must provide the opportunity for an informal
 hearing for a decision to terminate assistance for a breach of the HQS caused by the family as described in § 982.551(c).)
 (7) A PHA determination that the unit is not in accordance with HQS because of the family size.
 (8) A determination by the PHA to exercise or not to exercise any right or remedy against the owner under a HAP contract.
 (c) Notice to family. (1) In the cases described in paragraphs (a)(1) (i), (ii) and (iii) of this section, the PHA must notify the family that the family
 may ask for an explanation of the basis of the PHA determination, and that if the family does not agree with the determination, the family may
 request an informal hearing on the decision.
 (2) In the cases described in paragraphs (a)(1) (iv), (v) and (vi) of this section, the PHA must give the family prompt written notice that the family
 may request a hearing. The notice must:
 (i) Contain a brief statement of reasons for the decision,
 (ii) State that if the family does not agree with the decision, the family may request an informal hearing on the decision, and
 (iii) State the deadline for the family to request an informal hearing.
 (d) Expeditious hearing process. Where a hearing for a participant family is required under this section, the PHA must proceed with the hearing in
 a reasonably expeditious manner upon the request of the family.
 (e) Hearing procedures —(1) Administrative Plan. The Administrative Plan must state the PHA procedures for conducting informal hearings for
 participants.
 (2) Discovery —(i) By family. The family must be given the opportunity to examine before the PHA hearing any PHA documents that are
 directly relevant to the hearing. The family must be allowed to copy any such document at the family's expense. If the PHA does not make the
 document available for examination on request of the family, the PHA may not rely on the document at the hearing.
 (ii) By PHA. The PHA hearing procedures may provide that the PHA must be given the opportunity to examine at PHA offices before the PHA
 hearing any family documents that are directly relevant to the hearing. The PHA must be allowed to copy any such document at the PHA's
 expense. If the family does not make the document available for examination on request of the PHA, the family may not rely on the document at
 the hearing.
 (iii) Documents. The term “documents” includes records and regulations.
 (3) Representation of family. At its own expense, the family may be represented by a lawyer or other representative.
 (4) Hearing officer: Appointment and authority. (i) The hearing may be conducted by any person or persons designated by the PHA, other than a
 person who made or approved the decision under review or a subordinate of this person.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                               Page 55
 (ii) The person who conducts the hearing may regulate the conduct of the hearing in accordance with the PHA hearing procedures.
 (5) Evidence. The PHA and the family must be given the opportunity to present evidence, and may question any witnesses. Evidence may be
 considered without regard to admissibility under the rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings.
 (6) Issuance of decision. The person who conducts the hearing must issue a written decision, stating briefly the reasons for the decision. Factual
 determinations relating to the individual circumstances of the family shall be based on a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing.
 A copy of the hearing decision shall be furnished promptly to the family.
 (f) Effect of decision. The PHA is not bound by a hearing decision:
 (1) Concerning a matter for which the PHA is not required to provide an opportunity for an informal hearing under this section, or that otherwise
 exceeds the authority of the person conducting the hearing under the PHA hearing procedures.
 (2) Contrary to HUD regulations or requirements, or otherwise contrary to federal, State, or local law.
 (3) If the PHA determines that it is not bound by a hearing decision, the PHA must promptly notify the family of the determination, and of the
 reasons for the determination.
 (g) Restrictions on assistance to noncitizens. The informal hearing provisions for the denial of assistance on the basis of ineligible immigration
 status are contained in 24 CFR part 5.

 (Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 2577-0169)
 [60 FR 34695, July 3, 1995, as amended at 60 FR 45661, Sept. 1, 1995; 61 FR 13627, Mar. 27, 1996; 64 FR 26650, May 14, 1999; 65 FR 16823,
 Mar. 30, 2000; 80 FR 8247, Feb. 17, 2015; 80 FR 50575, Aug. 20, 2015]

 Subpart M—Special Housing Types
 Source: 63 FR 23865, Apr. 30, 1998, unless otherwise noted.

 § 982.601 Overview.
 (a) Special housing types. This subpart describes program requirements for special housing types. The following are the special housing types:
 (1) Single room occupancy (SRO) housing;
 (2) Congregate housing;
 (3) Group home;
 (4) Shared housing;
 (5) Manufactured home;
 (6) Cooperative housing (excluding families that are not cooperative members); and
 (7) Homeownership option.
 (b) PHA choice to offer special housing type. (1) The PHA may permit a family to use any of the following special housing types in accordance
 with requirements of the program: single room occupancy (SRO) housing, congregate housing, group home, shared housing, manufactured home
 when the family owns the home and leases the manufactured home space, cooperative housing or homeownership option.
 (2) In general, the PHA is not required to permit families (including families that move into the PHA program under portability procedures) to
 use any of these special housing types, and may limit the number of families using special housing types.
 (3) The PHA must permit use of any special housing type if needed as a reasonable accommodation so that the program is readily accessible to
 and usable by persons with disabilities in accordance with 24 CFR part 8.
 (4) For occupancy of a manufactured home, see § 982.620(a).
 (c) Program funding for special housing types. (1) HUD does not provide any additional or designated funding for special housing types, or for a
 specific special housing type (e.g., the homeownership option). Assistance for special housing types is paid from program funding available for
 the PHA's tenant-based program under the consolidated annual contributions contract.
 (2) The PHA may not set aside program funding or program slots for special housing types or for a specific special housing type.
 (d) Family choice of housing and housing type. The family chooses whether to use housing that qualifies as a special housing type under this
 subpart, or as any specific special housing type, or to use other eligible housing in accordance with requirements of the program. The PHA may
 not restrict the family's freedom to choose among available units in accordance with § 982.353.
 (e) Applicability of requirements. (1) Except as modified by this subpart, the requirements of other subparts of this part apply to the special
 housing types.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                           Page 56
 (2) Provisions in this subpart only apply to a specific special housing type. The housing type is noted in the title of each section.
 (3) Housing must meet the requirements of this subpart for a single special housing type specified by the family. Such housing is not subject to
 requirements for other special housing types. A single unit cannot be designated as more than one special housing type.
 [63 FR 23865, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 65 FR 55162, Sept. 12, 2000; 67 FR 64493, Oct. 18, 2002; 80 FR 8247, Feb. 17, 2015]

 Single Room Occupancy (SRO)

 § 982.602 SRO: Who may reside in an SRO?
 A single person may reside in an SRO housing unit.
 [64 FR 26650, May 14, 1999]

 § 982.603 SRO: Lease and HAP contract.
 For SRO housing, there is a separate lease and HAP contract for each assisted person.

 § 982.604 SRO: Voucher housing assistance payment.
 (a) For a person residing in SRO housing, the payment standard is 75 percent of the zero-bedroom payment standard amount on the PHA
 payment standard schedule. For a person residing in SRO housing in an exception area, the payment standard is 75 percent of the HUD-approved
 zero-bedroom exception payment standard amount.
 (b) The utility allowance for an assisted person residing in SRO housing is 75 percent of the zero bedroom utility allowance.
 [64 FR 26650, May 14, 1999]

 § 982.605 SRO: Housing quality standards.
 (a) HQS standards for SRO. As defined in § 982.4, HQS refers to the minimum quality standards developed by HUD in accordance with 24 CFR
 5.703 for housing assisted under the HCV program, including any variations approved by HUD for the PHA under 24 CFR 5.705(a)(3).
 However, the standards in this section apply in place of standards related to sanitary facilities, food preparation and refuse disposal, and space and
 security. Since the SRO units will not house children, the standards at 24 CFR part 35, subparts A, B, H, and R, applying to the PBC program,
 concerning lead-based paint, do not apply to SRO housing.
 (b) Performance requirements. (1) SRO housing is subject to the additional performance requirements in this paragraph (b).
 (2) Sanitary facilities, and space and security characteristics must meet local code standards for SRO housing. In the absence of applicable local
 code standards for SRO housing, the following standards apply:
 (i) Sanitary facilities. (A) At least one flush toilet that can be used in privacy, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, in proper operating
 condition, must be supplied for each six persons or fewer residing in the SRO housing.
 (B) If SRO units are leased only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half the required number of flush toilets.
 However, there must be at least one flush toilet in the building.
 (C) Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower must be supplied at all times with an adequate quantity of hot and cold running water.
 (D) All of these facilities must be in proper operating condition, and must be adequate for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste.
 The facilities must utilize an approvable public or private disposal system.
 (E) Sanitary facilities must be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing them. These facilities may not be
 located more than one floor above or below the SRO unit. Sanitary facilities may not be located below grade unless the SRO units are located on
 that level.
 (ii) Space and security. (A) No more than one person may reside in an SRO unit.
 (B) An SRO unit must contain at least one hundred ten square feet of floor space.
 (C) An SRO unit must contain at least four square feet of closet space for each resident (with an unobstructed height of at least five feet). If there
 is less closet space, space equal to the amount of the deficiency must be subtracted from the area of the habitable room space when determining
 the amount of floor space in the SRO unit. The SRO unit must contain at least one hundred ten square feet of remaining floor space after
 subtracting the amount of the deficiency in minimum closet space.
 (D) Exterior doors and windows accessible from outside an SRO unit must be lockable.
 (3) Access. (i) Access doors to an SRO unit must have locks for privacy in proper operating condition.
 (ii) An SRO unit must have immediate access to two or more approved means of exit, appropriately marked, leading to safe and open space at
 ground level, and any means of exit required by State and local law.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 57
 (iii) The resident must be able to access an SRO unit without passing through any other unit.
 (4) Sprinkler system. A sprinkler system that protects all major spaces, hard wired smoke detectors, and such other fire and safety improvements
 as State or local law may require must be installed in each building. The term “major spaces” means hallways, large common areas, and other
 areas specified in local fire, building, or safety codes.
 [63 FR 23865, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 88 FR 30503, May 11, 2023; 89 FR 38303, May 7, 2024]

 Congregate Housing

 § 982.606 Congregate housing: Who may reside in congregate housing.
 (a) An elderly person or a person with disabilities may reside in a congregate housing unit.
 (b)(1) If approved by the PHA, a family member or live-in aide may reside with the elderly person or person with disabilities.
 (2) The PHA must approve a live-in aide if needed as a reasonable accommodation so that the program is readily accessible to and usable by
 persons with disabilities in accordance with 24 CFR part 8. See § 982.316 concerning occupancy by a live-in aide.

 § 982.607 Congregate housing: Lease and HAP contract.
 For congregate housing, there is a separate lease and HAP contract for each assisted family.

 § 982.608 Congregate housing: Voucher housing assistance payment.
 (a) Unless there is a live-in aide:
 (1) For a family residing in congregate housing, the payment standard is the zero-bedroom payment standard amount on the PHA payment
 standard schedule. For a family residing in congregate housing in an exception area, the payment standard is the HUD-approved zero-bedroom
 exception payment standard amount.
 (2) However, if there are two or more rooms in the unit (not including kitchen or sanitary facilities), the payment standard for a family residing in
 congregate housing is the one-bedroom payment standard amount.
 (b) If there is a live-in aide, the live-in aide must be counted in determining the family unit size.
 [63 FR 23865, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 64 FR 26650, May 14, 1999]

 § 982.609 Congregate housing: Housing quality standards.
 (a) HQS standards for congregate housing. As defined in § 982.4, HQS refers to the minimum quality standards developed by HUD in
 accordance with 24 CFR 5.703 for housing assisted under the HCV program, including any variations approved by HUD for the PHA under 24
 CFR 5.705(a)(3). However, the standards in this section apply in place of standards related to food preparation and refuse disposal. Congregate
 housing is not subject to the requirement that the dwelling unit must have a kitchen area.
 (b) Food preparation and refuse disposal: Additional performance requirements. The following additional performance requirements apply to
 congregate housing:
 (1) The unit must contain a refrigerator of appropriate size.
 (2) There must be central kitchen and dining facilities on the premises. These facilities:
 (i) Must be located within the premises, and accessible to the residents;
 (ii) Must contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare, and serve food in a sanitary manner;
 (iii) Must be used to provide a food service that is provided for the residents, and that is not provided by the residents; and
 (iv) Must be for the primary use of residents of the congregate units and be sufficient in size to accommodate the residents.
 (3) There must be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food waste and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage
 where necessary.
 [63 FR 23865, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 88 FR 30504, May 11, 2023; 89 FR 38303, May 7, 2024]

 Group Home

 § 982.610 Group home: Who may reside in a group home.
 (a) An elderly person or a person with disabilities may reside in a State-approved group home.
 (b)(1) If approved by the PHA, a live-in aide may reside with a person with disabilities.
 (2) The PHA must approve a live-in aide if needed as a reasonable accommodation so that the program is readily accessible to and usable by



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                           Page 58
 persons with disabilities in accordance with 24 CFR part 8. See § 982.316 concerning occupancy by a live-in aide.
 (c) Except for a live-in aide, all residents of a group home, whether assisted or unassisted, must be elderly persons or persons with disabilities.
 (d) Persons residing in a group home must not require continual medical or nursing care.
 (e) Persons who are not assisted under the tenant-based program may reside in a group home.
 (f) No more than 12 persons may reside in a group home. This limit covers all persons who reside in the unit, including assisted and unassisted
 residents and any live-in aide.

 § 982.611 Group home: Lease and HAP contract.
 For assistance in a group home, there is a separate HAP contract and lease for each assisted person.

 § 982.612 Group home: State approval of group home.
 A group home must be licensed, certified, or otherwise approved in writing by the State (e.g., Department of Human Resources, Mental Health,
 Retardation, or Social Services) as a group home for elderly persons or persons with disabilities.

 § 982.613 Group home: Rent and voucher housing assistance payment.
 (a) Meaning of pro-rata portion. For a group home, the term “pro-rata portion” means the ratio derived by dividing the number of persons in the
 assisted household by the total number of residents (assisted and unassisted) residing in the group home. The number of persons in the assisted
 household equals one assisted person plus any PHA-approved live-in aide.
 (b) Rent to owner: Reasonable rent limit. (1) The rent to owner for an assisted person may not exceed the pro-rata portion of the reasonable rent
 for the group home.
 (2) The reasonable rent for a group home is determined in accordance with § 982.507. In determining reasonable rent for the group home, the
 PHA must consider whether sanitary facilities, and facilities for food preparation and service, are common facilities or private facilities.
 (c) Payment standard —(1) Family unit size. (i) Unless there is a live-in aide, the family unit size is zero or one bedroom.
 (ii) If there is a live-in aide, the live-in aide must be counted in determining the family unit size.
 (2) The payment standard for a person who resides in a group home is the lower of:
 (i) The payment standard amount on the PHA payment standard schedule for the family unit size; or (ii) The pro-rata portion of the payment
 standard amount on the PHA payment standard schedule for the group home size.
 (iii) If there is a live-in aide, the live-in aide must be counted in determining the family unit size.
 (d) Utility allowance. The utility allowance for each assisted person residing in a group home is the pro-rata portion of the utility allowance for
 the group home unit size.
 [63 FR 23865, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 64 FR 26651, May 14, 1999]

 § 982.614 Group home: Housing quality standards.
 (a) Compliance with HQS. The PHA may not give approval to reside in a group home unless the unit, including the portion of the unit available
 for use by the assisted person under the lease, meets HQS. As defined in § 982.4, HQS refers to the minimum quality standards developed by
 HUD in accordance with 24 CFR 5.703 for housing assisted under the HCV program, including any variations approved by HUD for the PHA
 under 24 CFR 5.705(a)(3).
 (b) Applicable HQS standards. (1) The standards in this section apply in place of standards in 24 CFR 5.703 that relate to sanitary facilities, food
 preparation and refuse disposal, space and security, structure and materials, and site and neighborhood.
 (2) The entire unit must comply with the HQS.
 (c) Additional performance requirements. The following additional performance requirements apply to a group home:
 (1) Sanitary facilities. (i) There must be a bathroom in the unit. The unit must contain, and an assisted resident must have ready access to:
 (A) A flush toilet that can be used in privacy;
 (B) A fixed basin with hot and cold running water; and
 (C) A shower or bathtub with hot and cold running water.
 (ii) All of these facilities must be in proper operating condition, and must be adequate for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste.
 The facilities must utilize an approvable public or private disposal system.
 (iii) The unit may contain private or common sanitary facilities. However, the facilities must be sufficient in number so that they need not be



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 59
 shared by more than four residents of the group home.
 (iv) Sanitary facilities in the group home must be readily accessible to and usable by residents, including persons with disabilities.
 (2) Food preparation and service. (i) The unit must contain a kitchen and a dining area. There must be adequate space to store, prepare, and serve
 foods in a sanitary manner.
 (ii) Food preparation and service equipment must be in proper operating condition. The equipment must be adequate for the number of residents
 in the group home. The unit must contain the following equipment:
 (A) A stove or range, and oven;
 (B) A refrigerator; and
 (C) A kitchen sink with hot and cold running water. The sink must drain into an approvable public or private disposal system.
 (iii) There must be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food waste and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage
 where necessary.
 (iv) The unit may contain private or common facilities for food preparation and service.
 (3) Space and security. (i) The unit must provide adequate space and security for the assisted person.
 (ii) The unit must contain a living room, kitchen, dining area, bathroom, and other appropriate social, recreational or community space. The unit
 must contain at least one bedroom of appropriate size for each two persons.
 (iii) Doors and windows that are accessible from outside the unit must be lockable.
 (4) Structure and material. (i) The unit must be structurally sound to avoid any threat to the health and safety of the residents, and to protect the
 residents from the environment.
 (ii) Ceilings, walls, and floors must not have any serious defects such as severe bulging or leaning, loose surface materials, severe buckling or
 noticeable movement under walking stress, missing parts or other significant damage. The roof structure must be firm, and the roof must be
 weathertight. The exterior or wall structure and exterior wall surface may not have any serious defects such as serious leaning, buckling, sagging,
 cracks or large holes, loose siding, or other serious damage. The condition and equipment of interior and exterior stairways, halls, porches,
 walkways, etc., must not present a danger of tripping or falling. Elevators must be maintained in safe operating condition.
 (iii) The group home must be accessible to and usable by a resident with disabilities.
 (5) Site and neighborhood. The site and neighborhood must be reasonably free from disturbing noises and reverberations and other hazards to the
 health, safety, and general welfare of the residents. The site and neighborhood may not be subject to serious adverse environmental conditions,
 natural or manmade, such as dangerous walks or steps, instability, flooding, poor drainage, septic tank back-ups, sewage hazards or mud slides,
 abnormal air pollution, smoke or dust, excessive noise, vibrations or vehicular traffic, excessive accumulations of trash, vermin or rodent
 infestation, or fire hazards. The unit must be located in a residential setting.
 [63 FR 23865, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 88 FR 30504, May 11, 2023; 89 FR 38303, May 7, 2024]

 Shared Housing

 § 982.615 Shared housing: Occupancy.
 (a) Sharing a unit. An assisted family may reside in shared housing. In shared housing, an assisted family shares a unit with the other resident or
 residents of the unit. The unit may be a house or an apartment.
 (b) Who may share a dwelling unit with assisted family? (1) If approved by the PHA, a live-in aide may reside with the family to care for a
 person with disabilities. The PHA must approve a live-in aide if needed as a reasonable accommodation so that the program is readily accessible
 to and usable by persons with disabilities in accordance with 24 CFR part 8. See § 982.316 concerning occupancy by a live-in aide.
 (2) Other persons who are assisted under the tenant-based program, or other persons who are not assisted under the tenant-based program, may
 reside in a shared housing unit.
 (3) The owner of a shared housing unit may reside in the unit. A resident owner may enter into a HAP contract with the PHA. However, housing
 assistance may not be paid on behalf of an owner. An assisted person may not be related by blood or marriage to a resident owner.
 [63 FR 23865, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 80 FR 8247, Feb. 17, 2015]

 § 982.616 Shared housing: Lease and HAP contract.
 For assistance in a shared housing unit, there is a separate HAP contract and lease for each assisted family.




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 60
 § 982.617 Shared housing: Rent and voucher housing assistance payment.
 (a) Meaning of pro-rata portion. For shared housing, the term “pro-rata portion” means the ratio derived by dividing the number of bedrooms in
 the private space available for occupancy by a family by the total number of bedrooms in the unit. For example, for a family entitled to occupy
 three bedrooms in a five bedroom unit, the ratio would be 3/5.
 (b) Rent to owner: Reasonable rent. (1) The rent to owner for the family may not exceed the pro-rata portion of the reasonable rent for the shared
 housing dwelling unit.
 (2) The reasonable rent is determined in accordance with § 982.507.
 (c) Payment standard. The payment standard for a family that resides in a shared housing is the lower of:
 (1) The payment standard amount on the PHA payment standard schedule for the family unit size; or
 (2) The pro-rata portion of the payment standard amount on the PHA payment standard schedule for the size of the shared housing unit.
 (d) Utility allowance. The utility allowance for an assisted family residing in shared housing is the pro-rata portion of the utility allowance for the
 shared housing unit.
 [63 FR 23865, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 64 FR 26651, May 14, 1999]

 § 982.618 Shared housing: Housing quality standards.
 (a) Compliance with HQS. The PHA may not give approval to reside in shared housing unless the entire unit, including the portion of the unit
 available for use by the assisted family under its lease, meets HQS.
 (b) Applicable HQS standards. As defined in § 982.4, HQS refers to the minimum quality standards developed by HUD in accordance with 24
 CFR 5.703 for housing assisted under the HCV program, including any variations approved by HUD for the PHA under 24 CFR 5.705(a)(3).
 However, the HQS standards in this section apply in place of standards related to space and security in 24 CFR 5.703.
 (c) Facilities available for family. The facilities available for the use of an assisted family in shared housing under the family's lease must include
 (whether in the family's private space or in the common space) a living room, sanitary facilities in accordance with the standards set in 24 CFR
 5.703, and food preparation and refuse disposal facilities in accordance with 24 CFR 5.703.
 (d) Space and security: Performance requirements. (1) The entire unit must provide adequate space and security for all its residents (whether
 assisted or unassisted).
 (2)(i) Each unit must contain private space for each assisted family, plus common space for shared use by the residents of the unit. Common
 space must be appropriate for shared use by the residents.
 (ii) The private space for each assisted family must contain at least one bedroom for each two persons in the family. The number of bedrooms in
 the private space of an assisted family may not be less than the family unit size.
 (iii) A zero or one bedroom unit may not be used for shared housing.
 [63 FR 23865, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 88 FR 30504, May 11, 2023; 89 FR 38303, May 7, 2024]

 Cooperative

 § 982.619 Cooperative housing.
 (a) Assistance in cooperative housing. This section applies to rental assistance for a cooperative member residing in cooperative housing.
 However, this section does not apply to:
 (1) Assistance for a cooperative member under the homeownership option pursuant to §§ 982.625 through 982.641; or
 (2) Rental assistance for a family that leases a cooperative housing unit from a cooperative member (such rental assistance is not a special
 housing type, and is subject to requirements in other subparts of this part 982).
 (b) Rent to owner. (1) The reasonable rent for a cooperative unit is determined in accordance with § 982.507. For cooperative housing, the rent to
 owner is the monthly carrying charge under the occupancy agreement/lease between the member and the cooperative.
 (2) The carrying charge consists of the amount assessed to the member by the cooperative for occupancy of the housing. The carrying charge
 includes the member's share of the cooperative debt service, operating expenses, and necessary payments to cooperative reserve funds. However,
 the carrying charge does not include down-payments or other payments to purchase the cooperative unit, or to amortize a loan to the family for
 this purpose.
 (3) Gross rent is the carrying charge plus any utility allowance.
 (4) Adjustments are applied to the carrying charge as determined in accordance with this section.
 (5) The occupancy agreement/lease and other appropriate documents must provide that the monthly carrying charge is subject to Section 8



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 61
 limitations on rent to owner.
 (c) Housing assistance payment. The amount of the housing assistance payment is determined in accordance with subpart K of this part.
 (d) Maintenance. (1) During the term of the HAP contract between the PHA and the cooperative, the dwelling unit and premises must be
 maintained in accordance with the HQS. If the dwelling unit and premises are not maintained in accordance with the HQS, the PHA may exercise
 all available remedies, regardless of whether the family or the cooperative is responsible for such breach of the HQS. PHA remedies for breach of
 the HQS include recovery of overpayments, abatement or other reduction of housing assistance payments, termination of housing assistance
 payments and termination of the HAP contract.
 (2) The PHA may not make any housing assistance payments if the contract unit does not meet the HQS, unless any defect is corrected within the
 period specified by the PHA and the PHA verifies the correction. If a defect is life-threatening, the defect must be corrected within no more than
 24 hours. For other defects, the defect must be corrected within the period specified by the PHA.
 (3) The family is responsible for a breach of the HQS that is caused by any of the following:
 (i) The family fails to perform any maintenance for which the family is responsible in accordance with the terms of the cooperative occupancy
 agreement between the cooperative member and the cooperative;
 (ii) The family fails to pay for any utilities that the cooperative is not required to pay for, but which are to be paid by the cooperative member;
 (iii) The family fails to provide and maintain any appliances that the cooperative is not required to provide, but which are to be provided by the
 cooperative member; or
 (iv) Any member of the household or guest damages the dwelling unit or premises (damages beyond ordinary wear and tear).
 (4) If the family has caused a breach of the HQS for which the family is responsible, the PHA must take prompt and vigorous action to enforce
 such family obligations. The PHA may terminate assistance for violation of family obligations in accordance with § 982.552.
 (5) Section 982.404 does not apply to assistance for cooperative housing under this section.
 (e) Live-in aide. (1) If approved by the PHA, a live-in aide may reside with the family to care for a person with disabilities. The PHA must
 approve a live-in aide if needed as a reasonable accommodation so that the program is readily accessible to and usable by persons with
 disabilities in accordance with 24 CFR part 8. See § 982.316 concerning occupancy by a live-in aide.
 (2) If there is a live-in aide, the live-in aide must be counted in determining the family unit size.
 [63 FR 23865, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 64 FR 26651, May 14, 1999; 65 FR 55162, Sept. 12, 2000; 80 FR 8247, Feb. 17, 2015]

 Manufactured Home

 § 982.620 Manufactured home: Applicability of requirements.
 (a) Assistance for resident of manufactured home. (1) A family may reside in a manufactured home with assistance under the program.
 (2) The PHA must permit a family to lease a manufactured home and space with assistance under the program.
 (3) The PHA may provide assistance for a family that owns the manufactured home and leases only the space. The PHA is not required to provide
 such assistance under the program.
 (b) Applicability. (1) The HQS in § 982.621 always apply when assistance is provided to a family occupying a manufactured home (under
 paragraph (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this section).
 (2) Sections 982.622 to 982.624 only apply when assistance is provided to a manufactured home owner to lease a manufactured home space.
 (c) Live-in aide. (1) If approved by the PHA, a live-in aide may reside with the family to care for a person with disabilities. The PHA must
 approve a live-in aide if needed as a reasonable accommodation so that the program is readily accessible to and usable by persons with
 disabilities in accordance with 24 CFR part 8. See § 982.316 concerning occupancy by a live-in aide.
 (2) If there is a live-in aide, the live-in aide must be counted in determining the family unit size.

 § 982.621 Manufactured home space rental: Housing quality standards.
 As defined in § 982.4, HQS refers to the minimum quality standards developed by HUD in accordance with 24 CFR 5.703 for housing assisted
 under the HCV program, including any variations approved by HUD for the PHA under 24 CFR 5.705(a)(3). A manufactured home also must
 meet the following requirements:
 (a) Performance requirement. A manufactured home must be placed on the site in a stable manner, and must be free from hazards such as sliding
 or wind damage.
 (b) Acceptability criteria. A manufactured home must be securely anchored by a tie-down device that distributes and transfers the loads imposed
 by the unit to appropriate ground anchors to resist wind overturning and sliding.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 62
 [63 FR 23865, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 88 FR 30504, May 11, 2023; 89 FR 38303, May 7, 2024]

 Manufactured Home Space Rental

 § 982.622 Manufactured home space rental: Rent to owner.
 (a) What is included. (1) Rent to owner for rental of a manufactured home space includes payment for maintenance and services that the owner
 must provide to the tenant under the lease for the space.
 (2) Rent to owner does not include the costs of utilities and trash collection for the manufactured home. However, the owner may charge the
 family a separate fee for the cost of utilities or trash collection provided by the owner.
 (b) Reasonable rent. (1) During the assisted tenancy, the rent to owner for the manufactured home space may not exceed a reasonable rent as
 determined in accordance with this section. Section 982.503 is not applicable.
 (2) The PHA may not approve a lease for a manufactured home space until the PHA determines that the initial rent to owner for the space is a
 reasonable rent. At least annually during the assisted tenancy, the PHA must redetermine that the current rent to owner is a reasonable rent.
 (3) The PHA must determine whether the rent to owner for the manufactured home space is a reasonable rent in comparison to rent for other
 comparable manufactured home spaces. To make this determination, the PHA must consider the location and size of the space, and any services
 and maintenance to be provided by the owner in accordance with the lease (without a fee in addition to the rent).
 (4) By accepting each monthly housing assistance payment from the PHA, the owner of the manufactured home space certifies that the rent to
 owner for the space is not more than rent charged by the owner for unassisted rental of comparable spaces in the same manufactured home park
 or elsewhere. The owner must give the PHA information, as requested by the PHA, on rents charged by the owner for other manufactured home
 spaces.

 § 982.623 Manufactured home space rental: Housing assistance payment.
 (a) Amount of monthly housing assistance payment. The monthly housing assistance payment is calculated as the lower of:
 (1) The PHA payment standard, determined in accordance with § 982.503 minus the total tenant payment; or
 (2) The family's eligible housing expenses minus the total tenant payment.
 (b) Eligible housing expenses. The family's eligible housing expenses are the total of:
 (1) The rent charged by the owner for the manufactured home space.
 (2) Charges for the maintenance and management the space owner must provide under the lease.
 (3) The monthly payments made by the family to amortize the cost of purchasing the manufactured home established at the time of application to
 a lender for financing the purchase of the manufactured home if monthly payments are still being made, including any required insurance and
 property taxes included in the loan payment to the lender.
 (i) Any increase in debt service or term due to refinancing after purchase of the home may not be included in the amortization cost.
 (ii) Debt service for installation charges incurred by a family may be included in the monthly amortization payments. Installation charges
 incurred before the family became an assisted family may be included in the amortization cost if monthly payments are still being made to
 amortize the charges.
 (4) The applicable allowances for tenant-paid utilities, as determined under §§ 982.517 and 982.624.
 (c) Distribution of housing assistance payment. In general, the monthly housing assistance payment is distributed as follows:
 (1) The PHA pays the owner of the space the lesser of the housing assistance payment or the portion of the monthly rent due to the owner. The
 portion of the monthly rent due to the owner is the total of:
 (i) The actual rent charged by the owner for the manufactured home space; and
 (ii) Charges for the maintenance and management the space owner must provide under the lease.
 (2) If the housing assistance payment exceeds the portion of the monthly rent due to the owner, the PHA may pay the balance of the housing
 assistance payment to the family. Alternatively, the PHA may pay the balance to the lender or utility company, in an amount no greater than the
 amount due for the month to each, respectively, subject to the lender's or utility company's willingness to accept the PHA's payment on behalf of
 the family. If the PHA elects to pay the lender or the utility company directly, the PHA must notify the family of the amount paid to the lender or
 the utility company and must pay any remaining balance directly to the family.
 (d) PHA option: Single housing assistance payment to the family. (1) If the owner of the manufactured home space agrees, the PHA may make
 the entire housing assistance payment to the family, and the family shall be responsible for paying the owner directly for the full amount of rent
 of the manufactured home space due to the owner, including owner maintenance and management charges. If the PHA exercises this option, the
 PHA may not make any payments directly to the lender or utility company.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                          Page 63
 (2) The PHA and owner of the manufactured home space must still execute the HAP contract, and the owner is still responsible for fulfilling all
 of the owner obligations under the HAP contract, including but not limited to complying with HQS and rent reasonableness requirements. The
 owner's acceptance of the family's monthly rent payment during the term of the HAP contract serves as the owner's certification to the
 reasonableness of the rent charged for the space in accordance with § 982.622(b)(4).
 (3) If the family and owner agree to the single housing assistance payment, the owner is responsible for collecting the full amount of the rent and
 other charges under the lease directly from the family. The PHA is not responsible for any amounts owed by the family to the owner and may not
 pay any claim by the owner against the family.
 [89 FR 38303, May 7, 2024]

 § 982.624 Manufactured home space rental: Utility allowance schedule.
 The PHA must establish utility allowances for manufactured home space rental. For the first twelve months of the initial lease term only, the
 allowances must include a reasonable amount for utility hook-up charges payable by the family if the family actually incurs the expenses because
 of a move. Allowances for utility hook-up charges do not apply to a family that leases a manufactured home space in place. Utility allowances for
 manufactured home space must not cover costs payable by a family to cover the digging of a well or installation of a septic system.

 Homeownership Option
 Source: 65 FR 55163, Sept. 12, 2000, unless otherwise noted.

 § 982.625 Homeownership option: General.
 (a) Applicability. The homeownership option is used to assist a family residing in a home purchased and owned by one or more members of the
 family.
 (b) Family status. A family assisted under the homeownership option may be a newly admitted or existing participant in the program.
 (c) Forms of homeownership assistance. (1) Allowable forms of homeownership assistance. A PHA may provide one of two forms of
 homeownership assistance for a family:
 (i) Monthly homeownership assistance payments; or
 (ii) A single downpayment assistance grant.
 (2) Prohibition against combining forms of homeownership assistance. A family may only receive one form of homeownership assistance.
 Accordingly, a family that includes a person who was an adult member of a family that previously received either of the two forms of
 homeownership assistance may not receive the other form of homeownership assistance from any PHA.
 (d) PHA choice to offer homeownership options. (1) The PHA may choose to offer either or both forms of homeownership assistance under this
 subpart, or choose not to offer either form of assistance. However, the PHA must offer either form of homeownership assistance if necessary as a
 reasonable accommodation for a person with disabilities in accordance with § 982.601(b)(3).
 (2) It is the sole responsibility of the PHA to determine whether it is reasonable to implement a homeownership program as a reasonable
 accommodation. The PHA will determine what is reasonable based on the specific circumstances and individual needs of the person with a
 disability. The PHA may determine that it is not reasonable to offer homeownership assistance as a reasonable accommodation in cases where the
 PHA has otherwise opted not to implement a homeownership program.
 (e) Family choice. (1) The family chooses whether to participate in the homeownership option if offered by the PHA.
 (2) If the PHA offers both forms of homeownership assistance, the family chooses which form of homeownership assistance to receive.
 (f) Live-in aide. The PHA must approve a live-in aide if needed as a reasonable accommodation so that the program is readily accessible to and
 useable by persons with disabilities in accordance with part 8 of this title. (See § 982.316 concerning occupancy by a live-in aide.)
 (g) PHA capacity. The PHA must have the capacity to operate a successful Section 8 homeownership program. The PHA has the required
 capacity if it satisfies either paragraph (g)(1), (g)(2), or (g)(3) of this section.
 (1) The PHA establishes a minimum homeowner downpayment requirement of at least 3 percent of the purchase price for participation in its
 Section 8 homeownership program, and requires that at least one percent of the purchase price come from the family's personal resources;
 (2) The PHA requires that financing for purchase of a home under its Section 8 homeownership program:
 (i) Be provided, insured, or guaranteed by the state or Federal government;
 (ii) Comply with secondary mortgage market underwriting requirements; or
 (iii) Comply with generally accepted private sector underwriting standards; or
 (3) The PHA otherwise demonstrates in its Annual Plan that it has the capacity, or will acquire the capacity, to successfully operate a Section 8
 homeownership program.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                          Page 64
 (h) Recapture of homeownership assistance. A PHA shall not impose or enforce any requirement for the recapture of voucher homeownership
 assistance on the sale or refinancing of a home purchased with assistance under the homeownership option.
 (i) Applicable requirements. The following specify what regulatory provisions (under the heading “homeownership option”) are applicable to
 either or both forms of homeownership assistance (except as otherwise specifically provided):
 (1) Common provisions. The following provisions apply to both forms of homeownership assistance:
 (i) Section 982.625 (General);
 (ii) Section 982.626 (Initial requirements);
 (iii) Section 982.627 (Eligibility requirements for families);
 (iv) Section 982.628 (Eligible units);
 (v) Section 982.629 (Additional PHA requirements for family search and purchase);
 (vi) Section 982.630 (Homeownership counseling);
 (vii) Section 982.631 (Home inspections, contract of sale, and PHA disapproval of seller);
 (viii) Section 982.632 (Financing purchase of home; affordability of purchase);
 (ix) Section 982.636 (Portability);
 (x) Section 982.638 (Denial or termination of assistance for family); and
 (xi) Section 982.641 (Applicability of other requirements).
 (2) Monthly homeownership assistance payments. The following provisions only apply to homeownership assistance in the form of monthly
 homeownership assistance payments:
 (i) Section 982.633 (Continued assistance requirements; family obligations);
 (ii) Section 982.634 (Maximum term of homeownership assistance);
 (iii) Section 982.635 (Amount and distribution of monthly homeownership assistance payment);
 (iv) Section 982.637 (Move with continued tenant-based assistance); and
 (v) Section 982.639 (Administrative fees).
 (3) Downpayment assistance grant. The following provision only applies to homeownership assistance in the form of a downpayment assistance
 grant: Section 982.643 (Downpayment assistance grants).
 [65 FR 55163, Sept. 12, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 64493, Oct. 18, 2002; 80 FR 8247, Feb. 17, 2015; 89 FR 38304, May 7, 2024]

 § 982.626 Homeownership option: Initial requirements.
 (a) List of initial requirements. Before commencing homeownership assistance for a family, the PHA must determine that all of the following
 initial requirements have been satisfied:
 (1) The family is qualified to receive homeownership assistance (see § 982.627);
 (2) The unit is eligible (see § 982.628); and
 (3) The family has satisfactorily completed the PHA program of required pre-assistance homeownership counseling (see § 982.630).
 (b) Additional PHA requirements. Unless otherwise provided in this part, the PHA may limit homeownership assistance to families or purposes
 defined by the PHA, and may prescribe additional requirements for commencement of homeownership assistance for a family. Any such limits or
 additional requirements must be described in the PHA Administrative Plan.
 (c) Environmental requirements. The PHA is responsible for complying with the authorities listed in § 58.6 of this title requiring the purchaser to
 obtain and maintain flood insurance for units in special flood hazard areas, prohibiting assistance for acquiring units in the coastal barrier
 resources system, and requiring notification to the purchaser of units in airport runway clear zones and airfield clear zones. In the case of units not
 yet under construction at the time the family enters into the contract for sale, the additional environmental review requirements referenced in §
 982.628(e) of this part also apply, and the PHA shall submit all relevant environmental information to the responsible entity or to HUD to assist
 in completion of those requirements.
 [63 FR 23865, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 72 FR 59938, Oct. 22, 2007]




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 65
 § 982.627 Homeownership option: Eligibility requirements for families.
 (a) Determination whether family is qualified. The PHA may not provide homeownership assistance for a family unless the PHA determines that
 the family satisfies all of the following initial requirements at commencement of homeownership assistance for the family:
 (1) The family has been admitted to the Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher program, in accordance with subpart E of this part.
 (2) The family satisfies any first-time homeowner requirements (described in paragraph (b) of this section).
 (3) The family satisfies the minimum income requirement (described in paragraph (c) of this section).
 (4) The family satisfies the employment requirements (described in paragraph (d) of this section).
 (5) The family has not defaulted on a mortgage securing debt to purchase a home under the homeownership option (see paragraph (e) of this
 section).
 (6) Except for cooperative members who have acquired cooperative membership shares prior to commencement of homeownership assistance, no
 family member has a present ownership interest in a residence at the commencement of homeownership assistance for the purchase of any home.
 (7) Except for cooperative members who have acquired cooperative membership shares prior to the commencement of homeownership
 assistance, the family has entered a contract of sale in accordance with § 982.631(c).
 (8) The family also satisfies any other initial requirements established by the PHA (see § 982.626(b)). Any such additional requirements must be
 described in the PHA Administrative Plan.
 (b) First-time homeowner requirements. At commencement of homeownership assistance for the family, the family must be any of the following:
 (1) A first-time homeowner (defined at § 982.4);
 (2) A cooperative member (defined at § 982.4); or
 (3) A family of which a family member is a person with disabilities, and use of the homeownership option is needed as a reasonable
 accommodation so that the program is readily accessible to and usable by such person, in accordance with part 8 of this title.
 (c) Minimum income requirements. (1) At commencement of monthly homeownership assistance payments for the family, or at the time of a
 downpayment assistance grant for the family, the family must demonstrate that the annual income, as determined by the PHA in accordance with
 § 5.609 of this title, of the adult family members who will own the home at commencement of homeownership assistance is not less than:
 (i) In the case of a disabled family (as defined in § 5.403(b) of this title), the monthly Federal Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefit for an
 individual living alone (or paying his or her share of food and housing costs) multiplied by twelve; or
 (ii) In the case of other families, the Federal minimum wage multiplied by 2,000 hours.
 (2)(i) Except in the case of an elderly family or a disabled family (see the definitions of these terms at § 5.403(b) of this title), the PHA shall not
 count any welfare assistance received by the family in determining annual income under this section.
 (ii) The disregard of welfare assistance income under paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section only affects the determination of minimum annual income
 used to determine if a family initially qualifies for commencement of homeownership assistance in accordance with this section, but does not
 affect:
 (A) The determination of income-eligibility for admission to the voucher program;
 (B) Calculation of the amount of the family's total tenant payment (gross family contribution); or
 (C) Calculation of the amount of homeownership assistance payments on behalf of the family.
 (iii) In the case of an elderly or disabled family, the PHA shall include welfare assistance for the adult family members who will own the home in
 determining if the family meets the minimum income requirement.
 (3) A PHA may establish a minimum income standard that is higher than those described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section for either or both
 types of families. However, a family that meets the applicable HUD minimum income requirement described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section,
 but not the higher standard established by the PHA shall be considered to satisfy the minimum income requirement if:
 (i) The family demonstrates that it has been pre-qualified or pre-approved for financing;
 (ii) The pre-qualified or pre-approved financing meets any PHA established requirements under § 982.632 for financing the purchase of the home
 (including qualifications of lenders and terms of financing); and
 (iii) The pre-qualified or pre-approved financing amount is sufficient to purchase housing that meets HQS in the PHA's jurisdiction.
 (d) Employment requirements. (1) Except as provided in paragraph (d)(2) of this section, the family must demonstrate that one or more adult
 members of the family who will own the home at commencement of homeownership assistance:
 (i) Is currently employed on a full-time basis (the term “full-time employment” means not less than an average of 30 hours per week); and



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 66
 (ii) Has been continuously so employed during the year before commencement of homeownership assistance for the family.
 (2) The PHA shall have discretion to determine whether and to what extent interruptions are considered to break continuity of employment during
 the year. The PHA may count successive employment during the year. The PHA may count self-employment in a business.
 (3) The employment requirement does not apply to an elderly family or a disabled family (see the definitions of these terms at § 5.403(b) of this
 title). Furthermore, if a family, other than an elderly family or a disabled family, includes a person with disabilities, the PHA shall grant an
 exemption from the employment requirement if the PHA determines that an exemption is needed as a reasonable accommodation so that the
 program is readily accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities in accordance with part 8 of this title.
 (4) A PHA may not establish an employment requirement in addition to the employment standard established by this paragraph.
 (e) Prohibition against assistance to family that has defaulted. The PHA shall not commence homeownership assistance for a family that includes
 an individual who was an adult member of a family at the time when such family received homeownership assistance and defaulted on a
 mortgage securing debt incurred to purchase the home.
 [65 FR 55163, Sept. 12, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 64493, Oct. 18, 2002; 80 FR 8247, Feb. 17, 2015]

 § 982.628 Homeownership option: Eligible units.
 (a) Initial requirements applicable to the unit. The PHA must determine that the unit satisfies all of the following requirements:
 (1) The unit is eligible. (See § 982.352. Paragraphs (a)(6) and (b) of § 982.352 do not apply.)
 (2) The unit is either a one-unit property (including a manufactured home) or a single dwelling unit in a cooperative or condominium.
 (3) The unit has been inspected by a PHA inspector and by an independent inspector designated by the family (see § 982.631).
 (4) The unit satisfies the HQS ( see 24 CFR 5.703 and § 982.631).
 (b) Purchase of home where family will not own fee title to the real property. Homeownership assistance may be provided for the purchase of a
 home where the family will not own fee title to the real property on which the home is located, but only if:
 (1) The home is located on a permanent foundation; and
 (2) The family has the right to occupy the home site for at least forty years.
 (c) PHA disapproval of seller. The PHA may not commence homeownership assistance for occupancy of a home if the PHA has been informed
 (by HUD or otherwise) that the seller of the home is debarred, suspended, or subject to a limited denial of participation under 2 CFR part 2424.
 (d) PHA-owned units. A family may purchase a PHA-owned unit, as defined in § 982.4, with homeownership assistance only if the following
 conditions are satisfied:
 (1) The PHA must inform the family, both orally and in writing, that the family has the right to purchase any eligible unit and a PHA-owned unit
 is freely selected by the family without PHA pressure or steering;
 (2) The unit is not ineligible housing;
 (3) The PHA must obtain the services of an independent entity, as defined in § 982.4 and in accordance with § 982.352(b)(1)(v)(B), to perform
 the following PHA functions:
 (i) Inspection of the unit for compliance with the HQS, in accordance with § 982.631(a);
 (ii) Review of the independent inspection report, in accordance with § 982.631(b)(4);
 (iii) Review of the contract of sale, in accordance with § 982.631(c); and
 (iv) Determination of the reasonableness of the sales price and any PHA provided financing, in accordance with § 982.632 and other
 supplementary guidance established by HUD.
 (e) Units not yet under construction. Families may enter into contracts of sale for units not yet under construction at the time the family enters
 into the contract for sale. However, the PHA shall not commence homeownership assistance for the family for that unit, unless and until:
 (1) Either:
 (i) The responsible entity completed the environmental review procedures required by 24 CFR part 58, and HUD approved the environmental
 certification and request for release of funds prior to commencement of construction; or
 (ii) HUD performed an environmental review under 24 CFR part 50 and notified the PHA in writing of environmental approval of the site prior to
 commencement of construction;
 (2) Construction of the unit has been completed; and
 (3) The unit has passed the required HQS inspection (see § 982.631(a)) and independent inspection (see § 982.631(b)).



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                            Page 67
 [65 FR 55163, Sept. 12, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 64494, Oct. 18, 2002; 67 FR 65865, Oct. 28, 2002; 67 FR 67522, Nov. 6, 2002; 72 FR
 59938, Oct. 22, 2007; 72 FR 73496, Dec. 27, 2007; 88 FR 30504, May 11, 2023; 89 FR 38304, May 7, 2024]

 § 982.629 Homeownership option: Additional PHA requirements for family search and purchase.
 (a) The PHA may establish the maximum time for a family to locate a home, and to purchase the home.
 (b) The PHA may require periodic family reports on the family's progress in finding and purchasing a home.
 (c) If the family is unable to purchase a home within the maximum time established by the PHA, the PHA may issue the family a voucher to lease
 a unit or place the family's name on the waiting list for a voucher.

 § 982.630 Homeownership option: Homeownership counseling.
 (a) Pre-assistance counseling. Before commencement of homeownership assistance for a family, the family must attend and satisfactorily
 complete the pre-assistance homeownership and housing counseling program required by the PHA (pre-assistance counseling).
 (b) Counseling topics. Suggested topics for the PHA-required pre-assistance counseling program include:
 (1) Home maintenance (including care of the grounds);
 (2) Budgeting and money management;
 (3) Credit counseling;
 (4) How to negotiate the purchase price of a home;
 (5) How to obtain homeownership financing and loan preapprovals, including a description of types of financing that may be available, and the
 pros and cons of different types of financing;
 (6) How to find a home, including information about homeownership opportunities, schools, and transportation in the PHA jurisdiction;
 (7) Advantages of purchasing a home in an area that does not have a high concentration of low-income families and how to locate homes in such
 areas;
 (8) Information on fair housing, including fair housing lending and local fair housing enforcement agencies; and
 (9) Information about the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (12 U.S.C. 2601 et seq. ) (RESPA), state and Federal truth-in-lending laws, and
 how to identify and avoid loans with oppressive terms and conditions.
 (c) Local circumstances. The PHA may adapt the subjects covered in pre-assistance counseling (as listed in paragraph (b) of this section) to local
 circumstances and the needs of individual families.
 (d) Additional counseling. The PHA may also offer additional counseling after commencement of homeownership assistance (ongoing
 counseling). If the PHA offers a program of ongoing counseling for participants in the homeownership option, the PHA shall have discretion to
 determine whether the family is required to participate in the ongoing counseling.
 (e) HUD-certified housing counselor. Any homeownership counseling provided to families in connection with this section must be conducted by
 a HUD certified housing counselor working for an agency approved to participate in HUD's Housing Counseling Program.
 [65 FR 55163, Sept. 12, 2000, as amended at 89 FR 38304, May 7, 2024]

 § 982.631 Homeownership option: Home inspections, contract of sale, and PHA disapproval of seller.
 (a) HQS inspection by PHA. The PHA may not commence monthly homeownership assistance payments or provide a downpayment assistance
 grant for the family until the PHA has inspected the unit and has determined that the unit passes HQS.
 (b) Independent inspection. (1) The unit must also be inspected by an independent professional inspector selected by and paid by the family.
 (2) The independent inspection must cover major building systems and components, including foundation and structure, housing interior and
 exterior, and the roofing, plumbing, electrical, and heating systems. The independent inspector must be qualified to report on property conditions,
 including major building systems and components.
 (3) The PHA may not require the family to use an independent inspector selected by the PHA. The independent inspector may not be a PHA
 employee or contractor, or other person under control of the PHA. However, the PHA may establish standards for qualification of inspectors
 selected by families under the homeownership option.
 (4) The independent inspector must provide a copy of the inspection report both to the family and to the PHA. The PHA may not commence
 monthly homeownership assistance payments, or provide a downpayment assistance grant for the family, until the PHA has reviewed the
 inspection report of the independent inspector. Even if the unit otherwise complies with the HQS (and may qualify for assistance under the PHA's
 tenant-based rental voucher program), the PHA shall have discretion to disapprove the unit for assistance under the homeownership option
 because of information in the inspection report.



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                         Page 68
 (c) Contract of sale. (1) Before commencement of monthly homeownership assistance payments or receipt of a downpayment assistance grant, a
 member or members of the family must enter into a contract of sale with the seller of the unit to be acquired by the family. The family must give
 the PHA a copy of the contract of sale (see also § 982.627(a)(7)).
 (2) The contract of sale must:
 (i) Specify the price and other terms of sale by the seller to the purchaser.
 (ii) Provide that the purchaser will arrange for a pre-purchase inspection of the dwelling unit by an independent inspector selected by the
 purchaser.
 (iii) Provide that the purchaser is not obligated to purchase the unit unless the inspection is satisfactory to the purchaser.
 (iv) Provide that the purchaser is not obligated to pay for any necessary repairs.
 (3) In addition to the requirements contained in paragraph (c)(2) of this section, a contract for the sale of units not yet under construction at the
 time the family is to enter into the contract for sale must also provide that:
 (i) The purchaser is not obligated to purchase the unit unless an environmental review has been performed and the site has received
 environmental approval prior to commencement of construction in accordance with 24 CFR 982.628.
 (ii) The construction will not commence until the environmental review has been completed and the seller has received written notice from the
 PHA that environmental approval has been obtained. Conduct of the environmental review may not necessarily result in environmental approval,
 and environmental approval may be conditioned on the contracting parties' agreement to modifications to the unit design or to mitigation actions.
 (iii) Commencement of construction in violation of paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section voids the purchase contract and renders homeownership
 assistance under 24 CFR part 982 unavailable for purchase of the unit.
 (d) PHA disapproval of seller. In its administrative discretion, the PHA may deny approval of a seller for any reason provided for disapproval of
 an owner in § 982.306(c).
 [65 FR 55163, Sept. 12, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 64494, Oct. 18, 2002; 72 FR 59938, Oct. 22, 2007; 72 FR 73497, Dec. 27, 2007; 80 FR
 8247, Feb. 17, 2015]

 § 982.632 Homeownership option: Financing purchase of home; affordability of purchase.
 (a) The PHA may establish requirements for financing purchase of a home to be assisted under the homeownership option. Such PHA
 requirements may include requirements concerning qualification of lenders (for example, prohibition of seller financing or case-by-case approval
 of seller financing), or concerning terms of financing (for example, a prohibition of balloon payment mortgages, establishment of a minimum
 homeowner equity requirement from personal resources, or provisions required to protect borrowers against high cost loans or predatory loans).
 A PHA may not require that families acquire financing from one or more specified lenders, thereby restricting the family's ability to secure
 favorable financing terms.
 (b) If the purchase of the home is financed with FHA mortgage insurance, such financing is subject to FHA mortgage insurance requirements.
 (c) The PHA may establish requirements or other restrictions concerning debt secured by the home.
 (d) The PHA may review lender qualifications and the loan terms before authorizing homeownership assistance. The PHA may disapprove
 proposed financing, refinancing or other debt if the PHA determines that the debt is unaffordable, or if the PHA determines that the lender or the
 loan terms do not meet PHA qualifications. In making this determination, the PHA may take into account other family expenses, such as child
 care, unreimbursed medical expenses, homeownership expenses, and other family expenses as determined by the PHA.
 (e) All PHA financing or affordability requirements must be described in the PHA Administrative Plan.
 [65 FR 55163, Sept. 12, 2000, as amended at 66 FR 33613, June 22, 2001]

 § 982.633 Homeownership option: Continued assistance requirements; Family obligations.
 (a) Occupancy of home. Homeownership assistance may only be paid while the family is residing in the home. If the family moves out of the
 home, the PHA may not continue homeownership assistance after the month when the family moves out. The family or lender is not required to
 refund to the PHA the homeownership assistance for the month when the family moves out.
 (b) Family obligations. The family must comply with the following obligations.
 (1) Ongoing counseling. To the extent required by the PHA, the family must attend and complete ongoing homeownership and housing
 counseling.
 (2) Compliance with mortgage. The family must comply with the terms of any mortgage securing debt incurred to purchase the home (or any
 refinancing of such debt).
 (3) Prohibition against conveyance or transfer of home. (i) So long as the family is receiving homeownership assistance, use and occupancy of
 the home is subject to § 982.551(h) and (i).



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                              Page 69
 (ii) The family may grant a mortgage on the home for debt incurred to finance purchase of the home or any refinancing of such debt.
 (iii) Upon death of a family member who holds, in whole or in part, title to the home or ownership of cooperative membership shares for the
 home, homeownership assistance may continue pending settlement of the decedent's estate, notwithstanding transfer of title by operation of law
 to the decedent's executor or legal representative, so long as the home is solely occupied by remaining family members in accordance with §
 982.551(h).
 (4) Supplying required information. (i) The family must supply required information to the PHA in accordance with § 982.551(b).
 (ii) In addition to other required information, the family must supply any information as required by the PHA or HUD concerning:
 (A) Any mortgage or other debt incurred to purchase the home, and any refinancing of such debt (including information needed to determine
 whether the family has defaulted on the debt, and the nature of any such default), and information on any satisfaction or payment of the mortgage
 debt;
 (B) Any sale or other transfer of any interest in the home; or
 (C) The family's homeownership expenses.
 (5) Notice of move-out. The family must notify the PHA before the family moves out of the home.
 (6) Notice of mortgage default. The family must notify the PHA if the family defaults on a mortgage securing any debt incurred to purchase the
 home.
 (7) Prohibition on ownership interest on second residence. During the time the family receives homeownership assistance under this subpart, no
 family member may have any ownership interest in any other residential property.
 (8) Additional PHA requirements. The PHA may establish additional requirements for continuation of homeownership assistance for the family
 (for example, a requirement for post-purchase homeownership counseling or for periodic unit inspections while the family is receiving
 homeownership assistance). The family must comply with any such requirements.
 (9) Other family obligations. The family must comply with the obligations of a participant family described in § 982.551. However, the following
 provisions do not apply to assistance under the homeownership option: § 982.551(c), (d), (e), (f), (g) and (j).
 (c) Statement of homeowner obligations. Before commencement of homeownership assistance, the family must execute a statement of family
 obligations in the form prescribed by HUD. In the statement, the family agrees to comply with all family obligations under the homeownership
 option.

 § 982.634 Homeownership option: Maximum term of homeownership assistance.
 (a) Maximum term of assistance. Except in the case of a family that qualifies as an elderly or disabled family (see paragraph (c) of this section),
 the family members described in paragraph (b) of this section shall not receive homeownership assistance for more than:
 (1) Fifteen years, if the initial mortgage incurred to finance purchase of the home has a term of 20 years or longer; or
 (2) Ten years, in all other cases.
 (b) Applicability of maximum term. The maximum term described in paragraph (a) of this section applies to any member of the family who:
 (1) Has an ownership interest in the unit during the time that homeownership payments are made; or
 (2) Is the spouse of any member of the household who has an ownership interest in the unit during the time homeownership payments are made.
 (c) Exception for elderly and disabled families. (1) As noted in paragraph (a) of this section, the maximum term of assistance does not apply to
 elderly and disabled families.
 (2) In the case of an elderly family, the exception only applies if the family qualifies as an elderly family at the start of homeownership assistance.
 In the case of a disabled family, the exception applies if at any time during receipt of homeownership assistance the family qualifies as a disabled
 family.
 (3) If, during the course of homeownership assistance, the family ceases to qualify as a disabled or elderly family, the maximum term becomes
 applicable from the date homeownership assistance commenced. However, such a family must be provided at least 6 months of homeownership
 assistance after the maximum term becomes applicable (provided the family is otherwise eligible to receive homeownership assistance in
 accordance with this part).
 (d) Assistance for different homes or PHAs. If the family has received such assistance for different homes, or from different PHAs, the total of
 such assistance terms is subject to the maximum term described in paragraph (a) of this section.

 § 982.635 Homeownership option: Amount and distribution of monthly homeownership assistance payment.
 (a) Amount of monthly homeownership assistance payment. While the family is residing in the home, the PHA shall pay a monthly
 homeownership assistance payment on behalf of the family that is equal to the lower of:



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                             Page 70
 (1) The payment standard minus the total tenant payment; or
 (2) The family's monthly homeownership expenses minus the total tenant payment.
 (b) Payment standard for family. (1) The payment standard for a family is the lower of:
 (i) The payment standard for the family unit size; or
 (ii) The payment standard for the size of the home.
 (2) If the home is located in an exception payment standard area, the PHA must use the appropriate payment standard for the exception payment
 standard area.
 (3) The payment standard amount may not be lower than what the payment standard amount was at commencement of homeownership
 assistance.
 (4) The PHA must use the same payment standard schedule, payment standard amounts, and subsidy standards pursuant to §§ 982.402 and
 982.503 for the homeownership option as for the rental voucher program.
 (c) Determination of homeownership expenses. (1) The PHA shall adopt policies for determining the amount of homeownership expenses to be
 allowed by the PHA in accordance with HUD requirements.
 (2) Homeownership expenses for a homeowner (other than a cooperative member) may only include amounts allowed by the PHA to cover:
 (i) Principal and interest on initial mortgage debt, any refinancing of such debt, and any mortgage insurance premium incurred to finance
 purchase of the home;
 (ii) Real estate taxes and public assessments on the home;
 (iii) Home insurance;
 (iv) The PHA allowance for maintenance expenses;
 (v) The PHA allowance for costs of major repairs and replacements;
 (vi) The PHA utility allowance for the home;
 (vii) Principal and interest on mortgage debt incurred to finance costs for major repairs, replacements or improvements for the home. If a member
 of the family is a person with disabilities, such debt may include debt incurred by the family to finance costs needed to make the home accessible
 for such person, if the PHA determines that allowance of such costs as homeownership expenses is needed as a reasonable accommodation so
 that the homeownership option is readily accessible to and usable by such person, in accordance with parts 8 and 100 of this title; and
 (viii) Land lease payments (where a family does not own fee title to the real property on which the home is located; see § 982.628(b)).
 (3) Homeownership expenses for a cooperative member may only include amounts allowed by the PHA to cover:
 (i) The cooperative charge under the cooperative occupancy agreement including payment for real estate taxes and public assessments on the
 home;
 (ii) Principal and interest on initial debt incurred to finance purchase of cooperative membership shares and any refinancing of such debt;
 (iii) Home insurance;
 (iv) The PHA allowance for maintenance expenses;
 (v) The PHA allowance for costs of major repairs and replacements;
 (vi) The PHA utility allowance for the home; and
 (vii) Principal and interest on debt incurred to finance major repairs, replacements or improvements for the home. If a member of the family is a
 person with disabilities, such debt may include debt incurred by the family to finance costs needed to make the home accessible for such person,
 if the PHA determines that allowance of such costs as homeownership expenses is needed as a reasonable accommodation so that the
 homeownership option is readily accessible to and usable by such person, in accordance with parts 8 and 100 of this title.
 (4) If the home is a cooperative or condominium unit, homeownership expenses may also include cooperative or condominium operating charges
 or maintenance fees assessed by the condominium or cooperative homeowner association.
 (d) Payment to lender or family. The PHA must pay homeownership assistance payments either:
 (1) Directly to the family or;
 (2) At the discretion of the PHA, to a lender on behalf of the family. If the assistance payment exceeds the amount due to the lender, the PHA
 must pay the excess directly to the family.
 (e) Automatic termination of homeownership assistance. Homeownership assistance for a family terminates automatically 180 calendar days after



GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                           Page 71
 the last homeownership assistance payment on behalf of the family. However, a PHA has the discretion to grant relief from this requirement in
 those cases where automatic termination would result in extreme hardship for the family.
 [65 FR 55163, Sept. 12, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 64494, Oct. 18, 2002; 89 FR 38304, May 7, 2024]

 § 982.636 Homeownership option: Portability.
 (a) General. A family may qualify to move outside the initial PHA jurisdiction with continued homeownership assistance under the voucher
 program in accordance with this section.
 (b) Portability of homeownership assistance. Subject to § 982.353(b) and (c), § 982.552, and § 982.553, a family determined eligible for
 homeownership assistance by the initial PHA may purchase a unit outside of the initial PHA's jurisdiction, if the receiving PHA is administering
 a voucher homeownership program and is accepting new homeownership families.
 (c) Applicability of Housing Choice Voucher program portability procedures. In general, the portability procedures described in §§ 982.353 and
 982.355 apply to the homeownership option and the administrative responsibilities of the initial and receiving PHA are not altered except that
 some administrative functions (e.g., issuance of a voucher or execution of a tenancy addendum) do not apply to the homeownership option.
 (d) Family and PHA responsibilities. The family must attend the briefing and counseling sessions required by the receiving PHA. The receiving
 PHA will determine whether the financing for, and the physical condition of the unit, are acceptable. The receiving PHA must promptly notify
 the initial PHA if the family has purchased an eligible unit under the program, or if the family is unable to purchase a home within the maximum
 time established by the PHA.
 (e) Continued assistance under § 982.637. Such continued assistance under portability procedures is subject to § 982.637.
 [65 FR 55163, Sept. 12, 2000, as amended at 80 FR 8247, Feb. 17, 2015]

 § 982.637 Homeownership option: Move with continued tenant-based assistance.
 (a) Move to new unit. (1) A family receiving homeownership assistance may move to a new unit with continued tenant-based assistance in
 accordance with this section. The family may move either with voucher rental assistance (in accordance with rental assistance program
 requirements) or with voucher homeownership assistance (in accordance with homeownership option program requirements).
 (2) The PHA may not commence continued tenant-based assistance for occupancy of the new unit so long as any family member owns any title
 or other interest in the prior home. However, when the family or a member of the family is or has been the victim of domestic violence, dating
 violence, sexual assault, or stalking, as provided in 24 CFR part 5, subpart L (Protection for Victims of Domestic Violence, Dating Violence,
 Sexual Assault, or Stalking), and the move is needed to protect the health or safety of the family or family member (or any family member has
 been the victim of a sexual assault that occurred on the premises during the 90-calendar-day period preceding the family's request to move), such
 family or family member may be assisted with continued tenant-based assistance even if such family or family member owns any title or other
 interest in the prior home.
 (3) The PHA may establish policies that prohibit more than one move by the family during any one-year period. However, these policies do not
 apply when the family or a member of the family is or has been the victim of domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, or stalking, as
 provided in 24 CFR part 5, subpart L, and the move is needed to protect the health or safety of the family or family member, or any family
 member has been the victim of a sexual assault that occurred on the premises during the 90-calendar-day period preceding the family's request to
 move.
 (b) Requirements for continuation of homeownership assistance. The PHA must determine that all initial requirements listed in § 982.626
 (including the environmental requirements with respect to a unit not yet under construction) have been satisfied if a family that has received
 homeownership assistance wants to move to such a unit with continued homeownership assistance. However, the following requirements do not
 apply:
 (1) The requirement for pre-assistance counseling (§ 982.630) is not applicable. However, the PHA may require that the family complete
 additional counseling (before or after moving to a new unit with continued assistance under the homeownership option).
 (2) The requirement that a family must be a first-time homeowner (§ 982.627) is not applicable.
 (c) When PHA may deny permission to move with continued assistance. The PHA may deny permission to move to a new unit with continued
 voucher assistance as follows:
 (1) Lack of funding to provide continued assistance. The PHA may deny permission to move with continued rental or homeownership assistance
 if the PHA determines that it does not have sufficient funding to provide continued assistance. The PHA must provide written notification to the
 local HUD Office within 10 business days of determining it is necessary to deny moves based on insufficient funding.
 (2) Termination or denial of assistance under § 982.638. At any time, the PHA may deny permission to move with continued rental or
 homeownership assistance in accordance with § 982.638.
 [63 FR 23865, Apr. 30, 1998, as amended at 72 FR 59938, Oct. 22, 2007; 80 FR 50575, Aug. 20, 2015; 81 FR 80817, Nov. 16, 2016]




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                        Page 72
 § 982.638 Homeownership option: Denial or termination of assistance for family.
 (a) General. The PHA shall terminate homeownership assistance for the family, and shall deny voucher rental assistance for the family, in
 accordance with this section.
 (b) Denial or termination of assistance under basic voucher program. At any time, the PHA may deny or terminate homeownership assistance in
 accordance with § 982.552 (Grounds for denial or termination of assistance) or § 982.553 (Crime by family members).
 (c) Failure to comply with family obligations. The PHA may deny or terminate assistance for violation of participant obligations described in §
 982.551 or § 982.633.
 (d) Mortgage default. The PHA must terminate voucher homeownership assistance for any member of family receiving homeownership
 assistance that is dispossessed from the home pursuant to a judgment or order of foreclosure on any mortgage (whether FHA-insured or
 non-FHA) securing debt incurred to purchase the home, or any refinancing of such debt. The PHA, in its discretion, may permit the family to
 move to a new unit with continued voucher rental assistance. However, the PHA must deny such permission, if:
 (1) The family defaulted on an FHA-insured mortgage; and
 (2) The family fails to demonstrate that:
 (i) The family has conveyed, or will convey, title to the home, as required by HUD, to HUD or HUD's designee; and
 (ii) The family has moved, or will move, from the home within the period established or approved by HUD.
 [65 FR 55163, Sept. 12, 2000, as amended at 66 FR 33613, June 22, 2001]

 § 982.639 Homeownership option: Administrative fees.
 The ongoing administrative fee described in § 982.152(b) is paid to the PHA for each month that homeownership assistance is paid by the PHA
 on behalf of the family.

 § 982.641 Homeownership option: Applicability of other requirements.
 (a) General. The following types of provisions (located in other subparts of this part) do not apply to assistance under the homeownership option:
 (1) Any provisions concerning the Section 8 owner or the HAP contract between the PHA and owner;
 (2) Any provisions concerning the assisted tenancy or the lease between the family and the owner;
 (3) Any provisions concerning PHA approval of the assisted tenancy;
 (4) Any provisions concerning rent to owner or reasonable rent; and
 (5) Any provisions concerning the issuance or term of voucher.
 (b) Subpart G requirements. The following provisions of subpart G of this part do not apply to assistance under the homeownership option:
 (1) Section 982.302 (Issuance of voucher; Requesting PHA approval of assisted tenancy);
 (2) Section 982.303 (Term of voucher);
 (3) Section 982.305 (PHA approval of assisted tenancy);
 (4) Section 982.306 (PHA disapproval of owner) (except that a PHA may disapprove a seller for any reason described in paragraph (c), see §
 982.631(d)).
 (5) Section 982.307 (Tenant screening);
 (6) Section 982.308 (Lease and tenancy);
 (7) Section 982.309 (Term of assisted tenancy);
 (8) Section 982.310 (Owner termination of tenancy);
 (9) Section 982.311 (When assistance is paid) (except that § 982.311(c)(3) is applicable to assistance under the homeownership option);
 (10) Section 982.313 (Security deposit: Amounts owed by tenant); and
 (11) Section 982.354 (Move with continued tenant-based assistance).
 (c) Subpart H requirements. The following provisions of subpart H of this part do not apply to assistance under the homeownership option:
 (1) Section 982.352(a)(6) (Prohibition of owner-occupied assisted unit);
 (2) Section 982.352(b) (PHA-owned housing); and




GH Federal Legal Source Cache • retrieved 2026-07-12                                                                                         Page 73
 (3) Those provisions of § 982.353 (Where family can lease a unit with tenant-based assistance) and § 982.355 (Portability: Administration by
 receiving PHA) that are inapplicable per § 982.636;
 (d) Subpart I requirements. The following provisions of subpart I of this part do not apply to assistance under the homeownership option:
 (1) Section 982.403 (Terminating HAP contract when unit is too small);
 (2) Section 982.404 (Maintenance: Owner and family responsibility; PHA remedies);
 (3) Section 982.405 (PHA unit inspection); and
 (4) Section 982.406 (Use of alternative inspections).
 (e) Subpart J requirements. The requirements of subpart J of this part (Housing Assistance Payments Contract and Owner Responsibility) (§§
 982.451-456) do not apply to assistance under the homeownership option.
 (f) Subpart K requirements. Except for those sections listed below, the requirements of subpart K of this part (Rent and Housing Assistance
 Payment) (§§ 982.501-521) do not apply to assistance under the homeownership option:
 (1) Section 982.503 (Voucher tenancy: Payment standard amount and schedule);
 (2) Section 982.516 (Family income and composition: Regular and interim reexaminations); and
 (3) Section 982.517 (Utility allowance schedule), except that § 982.517(d) does not apply because the utility allowance is always based on the
 size of the home bought by the family with homeownership assistance.
 (g) Subpart L requirements. The following provisions of subpart L of this part do not apply to assistance under the homeownership option:
 (1) Section 982.551(c) (HQS breach caused by family);
 (2) Section 982.551(d) (Allowing PHA inspection);
 (3) Section 982.551(e) (Violation of lease);
 (4) Section 982.551(g) (Owner eviction notice); and
 (5) Section 982.551(j) (Interest in unit).
 (h) Subpart M requirements. The following provisions of subpart M of this part do not apply to assistance under the homeownership option:
 (1) Sections 982.602-982.619; and
 (2) Sections 982.622-982.624.
 [65 FR 55163, Sept. 12, 2000, as amended at 67 FR 64494, Oct. 18, 2002; 80 FR 8247, Feb. 17, 2015; 80 FR 50575, Aug. 20, 2015; 89 FR
 38304, May 7, 2024]

 § 982.642 Homeownership option: Pilot program for homeownership assistance for disabled families.
 (a) General. This section implements the pilot program authorized by section 302 of the American Homeownership and Economic Opportunity
 Act of 2000. Under the pilot program, a PHA may provide homeownership assistance to a disabled family residing in a home purchased and
 owned by one or more members of the family. A PHA that administers tenant-based assistance has the choice whether to offer homeownership
