GH Real Estate approved legal-source text chunk — GH-KS-02_Kansas-Eviction-Fair-Housing-Screening-Safety-Addenda_CURRENT.part-002.txt — verified through 2026-07-12. Official source text controls.

motion may permit the use of depositions as provided in subsections (b)*(1), (2) and (4)
of K.S.A. 60-232, and amendments thereto, in the interest of justice and on such terms
and conditions as will fairly protect the parties.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 29; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 204; July 1.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3106.   Production of documents. Production of documents and things for inspection shall
be allowed in accordance with K.S.A. 60-234, and amendments thereto.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 30; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3201.   Pretrial hearing. (a) If the defendant appears on the date specified in the
summons and disputes the petition, or on or before such date files an answer, the court
may set the case for a pretrial hearing. Such hearing shall be held at least 14 days after
the date of the defendant's appearance. All parties shall be notified of the date, time and
place for the pretrial hearing.
(b) After a case has been set for pretrial, each of the parties shall submit to the other
party before the date scheduled for the pretrial hearing, copies of all documents which
support the petition or answer and an identification of all witnesses who will testify at
trial to support the same.
(c) If the defendant fails to appear at the pretrial hearing, the court may enter default
judgment against the defendant for the relief demanded in the petition without further
notice. If the plaintiff fails to appear at the pretrial hearing, the court may dismiss the
lawsuit upon such terms and conditions as the court deems proper.
(d) If both parties appear at the pretrial hearing, the court shall conduct a conference
with the parties to clarify the issues for trial and explore the possibilities of settlement.
If the defendant does not have a legal defense to the petition, the court may enter
judgment against the defendant for the relief demanded in the petition or for such other
relief that the court believes is fair and just. If the plaintiff has not stated a claim upon
which relief can be granted, the court may dismiss the petition.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 31; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 205; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3202.   Trial of actions by court or jury; evidence. (a) If a case is not settled or otherwise
disposed of at the pretrial hearing, the case shall be set for trial by the court.
(b) All lawsuits filed under this act shall be tried by the court, unless a trial by jury is
demanded by one of the parties. Demand for jury trial shall be made on or before the
date of the pretrial conference.
(c) A lawsuit tried by jury pursuant to the code of civil procedure for limited actions
shall be tried to a jury composed of six persons having the same qualifications of jurors
as other jurors in district court, unless the parties agree on a lesser number. The court
shall summon not less than 12 prospective jurors from the source and in the manner
provided for the summoning of petit jurors in the district court. When there is more
than one plaintiff or more than one defendant in such action, the court shall summon
three additional prospective jurors for each such additional plaintiff or defendant. Each
juror shall be paid as specified in K.S.A. 43-171, and amendments thereto, for each day
of attendance and shall receive mileage at the rate prescribed in K.S.A. 75-3203, and
amendments thereto. Such jury fees shall be paid by the county. The provisions of K.S.A.
60-247, subsections (b) through (h) of K.S.A. 60-248, K.S.A. 60-250 and 60-251, and
amendments thereto, shall be applicable to actions pursuant to the code of civil
procedure for limited actions insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of
this act.
(d) In all trials pursuant to the code of civil procedure for limited actions, the
testimony of witnesses shall be taken orally in open court, unless otherwise provided by
this act. All matters relating to witnesses and the admission of evidence shall be
governed by article 4 of chapter 60 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and amendments
thereto.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 32; January 1, 2001.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3301.   Default judgment. (a) The court may enter a default judgment in the following
situations:
(1) If a defendant fails to either appear or file a written answer on or before the time
specified in the summons, judgment may be entered against the defendant upon proof
of service and at such time as the plaintiff requests same, without further notice to the
defendant.
(2) If a defendant fails to appear at the time set for a pretrial or trial hereunder,
judgment may be entered against the defendant at the request of the plaintiff without
further notice to the defendant.
(3) If the defendant has filed a counterclaim against the plaintiff and the plaintiff fails
to appear at the time set for a pretrial or trial hereunder, judgment may be entered
against the plaintiff at the request of the defendant without further notice to the
plaintiff.
(b) A default judgment shall not be different in kind from or exceed the amount of the
relief sought in the demand for judgment.
(c) If a defendant seeks to set aside a default judgment for failure to appear at the time
specified in the summons, the defendant shall file a motion not more than 14 days from
the date of such judgment in a lawsuit where the defendant was personally served with
summons within the state, or not more than 45 days where service of summons was by
other than personal service within the state. If any party seeks to set aside any other
default judgment, that party shall file a motion not more than 14 days from the date of
such judgment. Any motion to set aside a default judgment, except for the time limits set
forth above, shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of subsection (b) of
K.S.A. 60-260, and amendments thereto.
(d) In cases where no service is had, for good cause shown, the court may set aside a
default judgment pursuant to the applicable provisions of subsection (b) of K.S.A. 60-260,
and amendments thereto.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 33; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 206; July 1.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3302.   Judgments. (a) A judgment may be entered by master or other journal entry or
judgment form approved by a judge. The judgment shall be effective from the date the
journal entry or judgment form is filed with the clerk of the court.
(b) One or more cases may be shown on a master journal entry or judgment form.
(c) When more than one claim for relief is presented in a lawsuit, the court may direct
the entry of a final judgment upon one or more but less than all of the claims upon such
terms and conditions as set forth in the judgment of the court.
(d) Except as to a party against whom a judgment is entered by default, every final
judgment shall grant the relief to which the party in whose favor it is rendered is
entitled, regardless of whether the party has demanded such relief in such party's
pleadings. Upon entry of such judgment, the party in whose favor judgment is entered
shall be deemed to have waived such party's right to recover any amount due in excess
of such judgment, and such party may not recover in a subsequent lawsuit any amount
in excess of such judgment.
(e) Whenever a party has commenced postjudgment proceedings for the enforcement
of a judgment, and such judgment is subsequently set aside, reversed on appeal or
otherwise nullified, such party shall not be liable for damages as a result of such
postjudgment proceedings, unless it can be proven that the judgment upon which such
proceedings were based was fraudulently obtained.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 34; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 6; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3303.   Interest on judgments. The provisions of K.S.A. 16-201, 16-204 and 16-205, and
amendments thereto, shall apply to judgments entered under the code of civil procedure
for limited actions.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 35; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3304.   Modification of judgment. Except as modified by subsections (h) and (j) of K.S.A. 61-
2912, and amendments thereto, the provisions of K.S.A. 60-252, 60-259 and 60-260, and
amendments thereto, shall apply to judgments entered under the code of civil procedure
for limited actions where such provisions are not inconsistent with other provisions of
the code.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 36; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 207; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3402.   Actions against residents. An action against a resident of this state, other than an
action for which venue is otherwise specifically prescribed by law, may be brought in
the county in which:
(a) The defendant resides;
(b) the plaintiff resides if the defendant is served therein;
(c) the cause of action arose;
(d) the defendant has a place of business or of employment if the defendant is served
therein;
(e) the estate of a deceased person is being probated if such deceased person was
jointly liable with the defendant and a demand to enforce such liability has been duly
exhibited in the probate proceedings of such decedent's estate; or
(f) there is located tangible personal property which is the subject of an action for the
possession thereof if immediate possession is sought in accordance with K.S.A. 61-3701,
and amendments thereto, at the time of the filing of the action.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 38; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3403.   Actions against corporations. An action against a domestic corporation, or against a
foreign corporation which is qualified to do business in this state, other than an action
for which venue is otherwise specifically prescribed by law, may be brought in the
county in which:
(a) Its registered office is located;
(b) the cause of action arose;
(c) the defendant is transacting business at the time of the filing of the petition; or
(d) there is located tangible personal property which is the subject of an action for the
possession thereof if immediate possession is sought in accordance with K.S.A. 61-3701,
and amendments thereto, at the time of the filing of the action.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 39; January 1, 2001.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3404.   Actions against nonresidents and nonqualified corporations. An action against a
nonresident of this state, or against a corporation which is not qualified to do business
in this state, other than an action for which venue is otherwise specifically prescribed by
law, may be brought in the county in which:
(a) The plaintiff resides, or if the plaintiff is a corporation, in the county of its
registered office or in which it maintains a place of business;
(b) the defendant is served;
(c) the cause of action arose;
(d) the defendant is transacting business at the time of the filing of the petition;
(e) there is property of the defendant, or debts owing to the defendant; or
(f) there is located tangible personal property which is the subject of an action for the
possession thereof if immediate possession is sought in accordance with K.S.A. 61-3701,
and amendments thereto, at the time of the filing of the action.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 40; January 1, 2001.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3405.   Actions against public utility, common carrier or transportation system. Any action
brought against a public utility, common carrier or transportation system for any
liability or penalty or forfeiture, may be brought in any county into or through which
such public utility, common carrier or transportation system operates regularly.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 41; January 1, 2001.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3406.   Multiple parties. If there are several plaintiffs properly joined and venue is
determined by the residence of one of them, it shall be necessary that such plaintiff's
claim is a substantial part of the action. If there are several defendants properly joined,
venue of the action may be determined at the election of the plaintiff as to any one of
the defendants against whom a substantial claim exists. If, before trial of an action on
the merits is commenced, a party with reference to whom venue was determined ceases
to be a party and venue would no longer be proper as to the remaining parties, on the
application of any remaining party promptly made, the cause shall be transferred to a
court of a county of proper jurisdiction and venue. If there is more than one such
county, the transfer shall be to a county selected by the plaintiff.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 42; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3407.   Change of venue. In all cases pursuant to the provisions of the code of civil
procedure for limited actions in which it shall be made to appear that a fair and
impartial trial cannot be had in the county where the suit is pending, for reasons other
than the disqualification of the judge, the court, upon application of either party, may
change the place of trial to the district court of some county where the objection does
not exist.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 43; January 1, 2001.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3408.   Time for objection to venue. Objection to the venue of an action shall not be
allowed except on timely motion made and for grounds established before trial of the
action is commenced on the merits.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 44; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3409.   Effect of improper venue. If an action is commenced in good faith and a
subsequent timely objection to the venue is sustained, or if before trial on the merit
commences, it is found that no cause of action exists in favor of or against a party upon
whom venue was dependent, the action shall be transferred to a court of proper
jurisdiction of any county of proper venue. If there is more than one such county, the
transfer shall be to the court of a county selected by the plaintiff. In accordance with
K.S.A. 61-4001, and amendments thereto, the receiving district court shall require the
payment of an appropriate docket fee from the movant.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 45; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3501.   Attachment. The provisions of article 7 of chapter 60 of the Kansas Statutes
Annotated, and amendments thereto, relating to attachment shall govern attachment
proceedings for actions pursuant to the code of civil procedure for limited actions,
except the provisions of K.S.A. 60-711, and amendments thereto, relating to the
appointment of a receiver, and the provisions of article 7 of chapter 60 of the Kansas
Statutes Annotated relating to the attachment of real property, shall not be applicable in
lawsuits filed under the code of civil procedure for limited actions.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 46; January 1, 2001.
                                2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3502.   Nature of garnishment. Garnishment is a procedure whereby the wages, money or
intangible property of a person can be seized or attached pursuant to an order of
garnishment issued by the court under the conditions set forth in the order.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 47; January 1, 2001.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3503.   When garnishment available before judgment. An order of garnishment before
judgment may be obtained only upon order of a judge of the district court pursuant to
the procedure to obtain an order of attachment. No order of garnishment may be
obtained before judgment where the property sought to be attached is wages earned by
the person being garnished.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 48; January 1, 2001.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3504.   When garnishment available after judgment. (a) As an aid to the collection of a
judgment, an order of garnishment may be obtained at any time after 14 days following
judgment. There is no requirement that an execution first be issued and returned
unsatisfied.
(b) The party requesting a garnishment shall file a request in an individual case or by a
master request covering more than one case asking the court to issue an order of
garnishment. The request shall designate whether the order of garnishment is to be
issued to attach earnings or to attach other property of the judgment debtor. If such
party seeks to attach earnings of the judgment debtor to enforce:
(1) An order of any court for the support of any person;
(2) an order of any court of bankruptcy under chapter 13 of the United States
bankruptcy code; or
(3) a debt due for any state or federal tax, the direction of the party shall so indicate.
No bond is required for an order of garnishment issued after judgment.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 49; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 208; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3505.   Order of garnishment, other than earnings. This section shall apply if the
garnishment is to attach intangible property other than earnings of the judgment
debtor.
(a) The order of garnishment and the appropriate form for the garnishee's answer
shall be served on the garnishee in the same manner as process is to be served pursuant
to K.S.A. 61-3001 through 61-3006, and amendments thereto, except that the garnishee
may be served by any means provided under K.S.A. 61-3001 through 61-3006, and
amendments thereto, at the garnishee's business or office location and this shall be
considered proper service. A copy of the answer form shall be served if the garnishment
order is not served electronically. If the order is served prior to a judgment, the order
shall also be served on the judgment debtor, if the judgment debtor can be found, except
that the order shall not be served on the judgment debtor until after service has been
made on the garnishee. Failure to serve the judgment debtor shall not relieve the
garnishee from liability under the order.
(b) The order of garnishment shall have the effect of attaching:
(1) All intangible property, funds, credits or other indebtedness belonging to or owing
the judgment debtor, other than earnings, which is in the possession or under the
control of the garnishee, and all such credits and indebtedness due from the garnishee
to the judgment debtor at the time of service of the order; and
(2) all such personal property coming into the possession or control of the garnishee
and belonging to the judgment debtor, and all such credits and indebtedness becoming
due to the judgment debtor between the time the order is served on the garnishee and
the time the garnishee makes the answer of the garnishee. Where the garnishee is an
executor or administrator of an estate in which the judgment debtor is or may become a
legatee or distributee thereof, the order of garnishment shall have the effect of attaching
and creating a first and prior lien upon any property or funds of such estate to which
the judgment debtor is entitled upon distribution of the estate, and such garnishee shall
be prohibited from paying over to the judgment debtor any of such property or funds
until so ordered by the court from which the order of garnishment was issued.
(c) The garnishee, without prior agreement, may withhold and retain to defray the
garnishee's costs, an administrative fee of $10 for each order of garnishment that
attaches funds, credits or indebtedness. Such administrative fee shall be in addition to
the amount required to be withheld under the order for garnishment, except that if the
amount required to be withheld under the order for garnishment is greater than the
amount of the funds, credits or indebtedness held by the garnishee, the fee shall be
deducted from the amount withheld.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 50; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 7; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3506. Garnishment of funds held by financial institution; administrative fee; order of garnishment
requirements. (a) The written direction of a party seeking an order of garnishment
attaching funds, credits or indebtedness held by a bank, savings and loan association,
credit union or finance company shall state the amount to be withheld, which shall be
110% of the amount of the judgment creditor's claim, in the case of prejudgment
garnishment, or 110% of the amount of the current balance due under the judgment, in
the case of postjudgment garnishment. The garnishee, without prior agreement, may
withhold and retain to defray the garnishee's costs, an administrative fee of $15 for each
order of garnishment that attaches funds, credits or indebtedness. Such administrative
fee shall be in addition to the amount required to be withheld under the order for
garnishment, except that if the amount required to be withheld under the order for
garnishment is greater than the amount of the funds, credits or indebtedness held by a
bank, savings and loan association, credit union or finance company, the fee shall be
deducted from the amount withheld.
(b) All orders of garnishment issued in this state for the purpose of attaching funds,
credits or indebtedness held by a bank, savings and loan association, credit union or
finance company shall include the judgment debtor's address and tax identification
number, if known, and shall specify the amount of funds, credits or indebtedness to be
withheld by the garnishee, which shall be 110% of the amount of the judgment creditor's
claim or 110% of the amount of the current balance due under the judgment, as stated
in the written direction of the party seeking the order.
(c) The forms provided by law for an order of garnishment attaching funds, credits or
indebtedness held by a bank, savings and loan association, credit union or finance
company shall include the following statement:
"If you hold any funds, credits or indebtedness belonging to or owing the judgment
debtor, the amount to be withheld by you pursuant to this order of garnishment is not to
exceed
$ ."
(amount stated in direction)
(d) (1) The forms provided by law for the answer to an order of garnishment attaching
funds, credits or indebtedness held by a bank, savings and loan association, credit union
or finance company shall include the following statement:
"The amount of the funds, credits or indebtedness belonging to or owing the judgment
debtor which I shall hold shall not exceed
$ ."
(amount stated in order)
(2) The answer shall further include information that such account is owned in joint
tenancy with one or more individuals who are not subject to the garnishment, if
applicable.
(e) If an order of garnishment attaches funds, credits or indebtedness held by a bank,
savings and loan association, credit union or finance company and the garnishee holds
funds or credits or is indebted to the judgment debtor in two or more accounts, the
garnishee may withhold payment of the amount attached from any one or more of such
accounts.
(f) If an order of garnishment attaches funds, credits or indebtedness held by a bank,
savings and loan association, credit union or finance company and the garnishee holds
funds or credits or is indebted to the judgment debtor in an account which judgment
debtor owns in joint tenancy with one or more individuals who are not subject to the
garnishment, the garnishee shall withhold the entire amount sought by the
garnishment. Neither the garnishor nor the garnishee shall be liable to the joint owners
if the ownership of the funds is later proven not to be the judgment debtor's.
(g) No party shall seek an order of garnishment attaching funds, credits or
indebtedness held by a bank, savings and loan association, savings bank, credit union or
finance company except on good faith belief of the party seeking garnishment that the
party to be served with the garnishment order has, or will have, assets of the judgment
debtor. Except as provided further, not more than two garnishments shall be issued by a
party seeking an order of garnishment applicable to the same claim or claims and
against the same judgment debtor in any 30-day period. A judge may order an exception
to this subsection in any case in which the party seeking the garnishment shall in person
or by attorney: (1) Certify that the garnishment is not for the purpose of harassment of
the debtor, and (2) state facts demonstrating to the satisfaction of the judge that there is
reason to believe that the garnishee has property or credits of the debtor which are not
exempt from execution.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 51; L. 2012, ch. 68, § 5; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3507.   Order of garnishment, earnings. This section must apply if the garnishment is to
attach earnings of the judgment debtor.
(a) The order of garnishment and the appropriate form for the garnishee's answer
must be served on the garnishee in the same manner as process is to be served pursuant
to K.S.A. 61-3001 through 61-3006, and amendments thereto, at the garnishee's business
or office location and this must be considered proper service. A copy of the answer form
must be served if the garnishment order is not served electronically. If the party having
requested the garnishment is notified by the garnishee that the judgment debtor has
never been employed by the garnishee or the judgment debtor's employment has been
terminated, the party seeking the garnishment must forthwith file a release with the
clerk of the court of such garnishment.
(b) The order of garnishment must have the effect of attaching the nonexempt portion
of the judgment debtor's earnings for all pay periods which end while the order is in
effect. The order must remain in effect until either of the following occur, whichever is
sooner: (1) The judgment is paid; or (2) the garnishment is released. The party for whom
the garnishment is issued must file a release with the clerk of the court upon satisfaction
of the judgment and provide a copy thereof to the defendant and garnishee. Nonexempt
earnings are earnings which are not exempt from wage garnishment pursuant to K.S.A.
60-2310, and amendments thereto. Computation of the nonexempt portion of the
judgment debtor's wages for the pay period or periods covered by the order must be
made in accordance with the directions accompanying the garnishee's answer form
pursuant to the order of garnishment. The order of garnishment must also constitute an
order of the court directing the garnishee to pay to the judgment creditor all earnings
which are to be withheld by the garnishee under the order of garnishment as more
particularly provided in the answer of the garnishee. A party or the court may request a
written explanation of the garnishee's computations of earnings withheld during any
pay period and the explanation must be submitted by affidavit to all parties and the
court within 14 days after such request. Service of the request must be in the same
manner as process is to be served pursuant to K.S.A. 61-3001 through 61-3006, and
amendments thereto.
(c) From income due the judgment debtor, the garnishee may withhold and retain to
defray the garnishee's costs, an administrative fee of $10 for each pay period for which
income is withheld, not to exceed $20 for each 30 day period for which income is
withheld, whichever is less. Such administrative fee must be in addition to the amount
required to be withheld under the order for garnishment. If the addition of this fee
causes the total amount withheld to exceed the restrictions imposed by subsection (b) of
K.S.A. 60-2310, and amendments thereto, the fee must be deducted from the amount
withheld.
(d) The party having requested the garnishment must provide the garnishee the
unsatisfied balance of the judgment at the time of issuance of the order of garnishment.
(e) For any continuing garnishment, the party having requested the garnishment must
maintain an accounting and record of the judgment reflecting thereon all garnishment
proceeds received and applied, all interest accrued thereon, and any and all credits
applied in satisfaction thereof, and the remaining unsatisfied balance of such judgment.
The party requesting the garnishment must produce a copy of such accounting and
record upon request of the court. The garnishee may request, in writing by first class
mail, an unsatisfied balance from the judgment creditor or, if represented by an
attorney, such request may also be by facsimile or electronic mail with read receipt
confirmation. If the garnishee fails to receive a response, within seven days following
the request, the garnishee may submit a written statement to the judgment creditor or,
if represented, to the judgment creditor's attorney in the same fashion as the original
request, advising that the garnishee intends to stop withholding earnings pursuant to
the garnishment order 14 days following the date of the statement unless the garnishee
receives written notice of objection from the judgment creditor or judgment creditor's
attorney as well as the requested unsatisfied balance. If no objection is timely received
by the garnishee, the garnishee will thereafter have no duty to withhold earnings.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 52; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 8; L. 2010, ch. 85, § 4; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3508.   Notice to judgment debtor; hearing on claim of exemption. (a) Immediately following
the time the order of garnishment is served on the garnishee, the party seeking the
garnishment shall send a notice to the judgment debtor in any reasonable manner,
notifying the judgment debtor:
(1) That a garnishment order has been issued against the judgment debtor and the
effect of such order;
(2) of the judgment debtor's right to assert any claim of exemption allowed under the
law with respect to a garnishment against property other than earnings or of the
judgment debtor's right to object to the calculation of exempt and nonexempt earnings
with respect to a garnishment against the earnings of the debtor; and
(3) of the judgment debtor's right to a hearing on such claim or objection. The notice
shall contain a description of the exemptions that are applicable to garnishments and
the procedure by which the judgment debtor can assert any claim of exemption.
(b) If the judgment debtor requests a hearing to assert any claim of exemption, the
request shall be filed no later than 14 days following the date the notice is served on the
judgment debtor. If a hearing is requested, the hearing shall be held by the court no
sooner than seven days nor later than 14 days after the request is filed. At the time the
request for hearing is filed, the judgment debtor shall obtain from the clerk or court the
date and time for the hearing which shall be noted on the request form. Immediately
after the request for hearing is filed, the judgment debtor shall hand-deliver to the party
seeking the garnishment or such party's attorney, if the party is represented by an
attorney, or mail to the party seeking the garnishment or such party's attorney, if the
party is represented by an attorney, by first-class mail at the party seeking the
garnishment or such party's attorney's last known address, a copy of the request for
hearing.
(c) If a hearing is held, the judgment debtor shall have the burden of proof to show
that some or all of the property subject to the garnishment is exempt, and the court shall
enter an order determining the exemption and such other order or orders as is
appropriate.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 53; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 9; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 209; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3509. Answer of garnishee; attachment of intangible property other than earnings. This section
shall apply if the garnishment is to attach intangible property other than earnings of the
judgment debtor.
(a) Within 14 days after service upon a garnishee of an order of garnishment the
garnishee shall complete the answer in accordance with the instructions accompanying
the answer form stating the facts with respect to the demands of the order.
(b) (1) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(2), the garnishee shall send the
completed answer to the judgment creditor's attorney at the address listed on the
answer form or, if the judgment creditor does not have an attorney, to the judgment
creditor and judgment debtor at the addresses listed on the answer form. The answer
shall be supported by unsworn declaration in the manner set forth on the answer form.
(2) If the garnishee does not have assets of the judgment debtor, the garnishee shall
send the completed answer to the judgment creditor's attorney at the address listed on
the answer form or, if the judgment creditor does not have an attorney, to the judgment
creditor at the address listed on the answer form. The answer shall be supported by
unsworn declaration in the manner set forth on the answer form.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 54; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 10; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 210; L. 2012, ch. 68,
§ 6; L. 2013, ch. 31, § 2; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3510.   Attaching earnings. This section must apply if the garnishment is to attach
earnings of the judgment debtor.
(a) Within 14 days following the date of service upon a garnishee of an initial order of
garnishment, the garnishee must complete the answer in accordance with the
instructions accompanying the answer form and send the completed answer to each
judgment creditor and judgment debtor at the addresses listed on the answer form. The
garnishee must designate on the answer in the space provided on the answer form the
name and case number for each judgment creditor who has a garnishment order in
effect for the same debtor and the amount that is due each judgment creditor under the
garnishment in accordance with the instructions accompanying the answer form. Only
one answer needs to be completed for each judgment debtor by the garnishee and the
garnishee may duplicate the completed answer in any manner the garnishee desires for
distribution to each judgment creditor and judgment debtor. The answer must be
supported by unsworn declaration in the manner set forth on the answer form. Once
the garnishee has distributed the answer to the initial order of garnishment, no further
answer is required. A party or the court may request a written explanation of the
garnishee's computations of earnings withheld during any pay period and the
explanation must be submitted by affidavit to all parties and the court within 14 days
after such request. Service of the request must be in the same manner as process is to be
served pursuant to K.S.A. 61-3001 through 61-3006, and amendments thereto.
(b) If there are other liens against the judgment debtor's earnings which by law have
priority over garnishments, the garnishee must so indicate on the answer. In such event,
the garnishment must remain in effect but no earnings of the debtor must be withheld
under the garnishment order unless and until all liens having priority are released or
satisfied or the earnings being withheld under all of such liens are less than the amount
which is exempt under K.S.A. 60-2310, and amendments thereto.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 55; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 11; L. 2010, ch. 85, § 5; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3511. Reply by judgment creditor or judgment debtor; notification and hearing; burden of proof.
(a) No later than 14 days after the garnishee makes the answer and sends it to the
judgment creditor and judgment debtor, the judgment creditor or judgment debtor, or
both, may file a reply disputing any statement in the answer of the garnishee. A copy of
the reply shall be sent by the party filing same to the other party, to any other judgment
creditors affected and to the garnishee. The party filing the reply shall notify the court
and schedule a hearing on the reply to be held within 30 days after filing of the reply.
(b) At the hearing, the court shall determine and rule on all issues related to the reply.
The burden of proof shall be upon the party filing the reply to disprove the statements
of the answer, except that the garnishee shall have the burden of proving offsets or
indebtedness claimed to be due from the judgment debtor to the garnishee, or liens
asserted by the garnishee against personal property of the judgment debtor. The
provisions of K.S.A. 60-719, and amendments thereto, relating to offsets claimed by the
garnishee shall be applicable to lawsuits filed pursuant to the code of civil procedure for
limited actions.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 56; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 211; L. 2012, ch. 68, § 7; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3512. Garnishee's payment to the judgment creditor; refund of overpayment; release of funds;
nonliability of garnishee. (a) The court shall direct the garnishee to pay to the judgment
creditor such amount that the garnishee is holding, as indicated by the answer, or such
lesser amount as warranted, if:
(1) The garnishment has attached to intangible property other than earnings of the
judgment debtor;
(2) fourteen days have passed since receipt of the answer of the garnishee by the
judgment creditor; and
(3) no reply to the answer has been filed.
(b) The judgment creditor shall promptly refund to the judgment debtor any
overpayment of the claim. The garnishee may release the funds, credits or indebtedness
that have been attached pursuant to the order of garnishment if no order to pay the
judgment creditor has been received within 60 days following the receipt of the answer
of the garnishee by the judgment creditor.
(c) The garnishee shall not be liable to any judgment creditor or judgment debtor and
shall not be assessed any penalty by reason of any action taken in good faith by the
garnishee in accordance with the provisions of article 35 of chapter 61 of the Kansas
Statutes Annotated, and amendments thereto.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 57; L. 2003, ch. 131, § 2; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 212; L. 2012, ch. 68,
§ 8; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3513.   Payment of earnings withheld by garnishee. This section shall apply if the
garnishment is to attach earnings of the judgment debtor. If no reply is made to the
answer of garnishee within 14 days following the date the garnishee has sent the
completed answer to the judgment creditor and judgment debtor, the garnishee shall
promptly thereafter pay the earnings withheld as indicated on the answer to all
judgment creditors designated on the answer in the amount due each as indicated on
the answer, unless the garnishee receives prior to such payment an order of the court to
the contrary. If any judgment creditor receives more than they are entitled to, that
judgment creditor shall promptly pay the excess amount pro-rata to the other judgment
creditors designated on the answer, or if no such other judgment creditors are
designated, the judgment creditor shall promptly pay the excess amount to the judgment
debtor.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 58; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 12; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 213; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3514.   Failure of garnishee to answer. If the garnishee fails to answer within the time and
manner specified in the order of garnishment, the judgment creditor may file a motion
and shall send a copy of the motion to the garnishee and the judgment debtor in the
manner allowed under K.S.A. 61-2907, and amendments thereto. At the hearing on the
motion, the court may grant judgment against the garnishee for the amount of the
judgment creditor's judgment or claim against the judgment debtor or for such other
amount as the court deems reasonable and proper, and for the expenses and attorney
fees of the judgment creditor. If the claim of the plaintiff has not been reduced to
judgment, the liability of the garnishee shall be limited to the judgment ultimately
rendered against the judgment debtor.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 59; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3515.   Failure of garnishee to pay. If after the time the garnishee is to make payment of
funds or property held under a garnishment, the garnishee fails or refuses to pay or
deliver property to the judgment creditor, the judgment creditor may file a motion and
shall send a copy of the motion to the garnishee and the judgment debtor in the manner
allowed under K.S.A. 61-2907, and amendments thereto. At the hearing on the motion,
the court may find the garnishee in contempt and punish the garnishee by a fine or may
enter judgment against the garnishee for such amount as the court deems reasonable
and proper, including the expenses and attorney fees of the judgment creditor.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 60; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3516.   Miscellaneous garnishment provisions. The provisions of K.S.A. 60-721, 60-722, 60-
723 and 60-724, and amendment thereto, shall be applicable to lawsuits filed pursuant to
the code of civil procedure for limited actions.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 61; January 1, 2001.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3601.   Stay of proceedings to enforce judgments. The provisions of K.S.A. 60-262, and
amendments thereto, shall apply to judgments entered under the code of civil procedure
for limited actions, except as to judgments entered in eviction lawsuits under sections
K.S.A. 61-3801 through 61-3808, and amendments thereto. A judgment entered in an
eviction lawsuit may be enforced as soon as it is entered.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 62; January 1, 2001.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3602.   Procedure. General and special executions or orders of sale upon judgments
entered under the code of civil procedure for limited actions shall be taken in the
manner provided in article 24 of chapter 60 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and
amendments thereto. The provisions of K.S.A. 60-2410, 60-2414 and 60-2416, and
amendments thereto, shall not be applicable to post-judgment proceedings pursuant to
the code of civil procedure for limited actions, nor shall execution and orders of sale
issued pursuant to the code of civil procedure for limited actions be levied upon real
property of the judgment debtor except as provided in K.S.A. 60-2418, and amendments
thereto.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 63; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3603.   Exemption from seizure and sale. The provisions of article 23 of chapter 60 of the
Kansas Statutes Annotated, and amendments thereto, relating to exemptions from
seizure and sale, shall apply to attachments, executions and other process issued from
any court in this state pursuant to the code of civil procedure for limited actions.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 64; January 1, 2001.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3604.   Hearing in aid of execution. (a) As an aid to the collection of a judgment, the
judgment creditor is entitled to have an order for a hearing in aid of execution issued by
the court at any time after 14 days after judgment. There is no requirement that an
execution first be issued and returned unsatisfied. No application for such order needs
to be filed except as specially required in this section.
(b) An order for a hearing in aid of execution may be issued at the request of a
judgment creditor in an individual case or by a master request covering more than one
case, and shall require the judgment debtor to either: (1) Contact the judgment creditor
or attorney prior to the date set for the hearing to furnish information under oath or
penalty of perjury concerning the judgment debtor's property and income; or (2) appear
and furnish information under oath or penalty of perjury when required by the court
concerning the debtor's property and income before the court at a time and place
specified in the order within the county where the court is situated. The court may
cancel the hearing if the judgment debtor has furnished to the judgment creditor
satisfactory information concerning the debtor's property and income prior to the date
and time for the hearing. Witnesses may also be subpoenaed to testify at the hearing.
(c) If the judgment debtor resides in another county in this state or outside of this state,
the court can order such judgment debtor to appear if the court finds that it will not
cause undue hardship on the judgment debtor to appear.
(d) It shall be the duty of the judge to assist in the enforcement of the judgments of the
court. To this end, at any hearing in aid of execution, when the existence of any
nonexempt property of the judgment debtor is disclosed, the court shall order the
judgment debtor to deliver the property to the sheriff or a duly appointed process
server. If the property is other than currency, the property shall be sold in the same
manner as other property taken under execution is sold and the proceeds from the sale
shall be applied to the judgment and costs.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 65; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 13; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 214; July 1.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3605.   Order back procedure. If a judgment debtor appears pursuant to an order for a
hearing in aid of execution, the court may order the debtor to return to court from time
to time to furnish current information under the procedure set forth in K.S.A. 61-3604,
and amendments thereto. To avoid unnecessary filings, the court shall adopt a policy
limiting the frequency with which the judgment debtor may be ordered to return to
court. Such policy shall provide that a judgment debtor who has made regular payments
as agreed between the parties, or who is found to be disabled and otherwise unable to
pay, shall not be required to return to court more frequently than yearly.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 66; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3606.   Contempt. If a person fails to appear in response to an order for a hearing in aid
of execution, or if a person who has been subpoenaed to testify at the hearing fails to
appear or to testify concerning anything about which the person can lawfully be
questioned, the court shall issue a citation for contempt to that person providing that the
person must appear in court at a date and time specified to show cause why the debtor
should not be held in contempt and punished for contempt. The citation for contempt
does not need to be supported by affidavit or other verification.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 67; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 14; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3607.   Hearing; penalty. If on hearing, the court determines that a judgment debtor is
guilty of contempt, the court may punish the person by a fine in an amount to be set by
the court or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not to exceed 30 days, or
both. The court may also order the person guilty of contempt to pay the reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the judgment creditor in the filing of the contempt citation
and the hearing thereon.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 68; January 1, 2001.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3608.   Bench warrant; hearing; penalty. (a) If a person fails to comply with the
requirements of K.S.A. 61-3606, and amendments thereto, or if it appears to the court
that the person is hiding to avoid the process of the court or is about to leave the county
for that purpose, the court may issue a bench warrant commanding the sheriff to whom
it is directed to bring such person before the court to answer for contempt. The bench
warrant does not need to be supported by affidavit or other verification. The court may
make such orders concerning the release of the person pending the hearing as the court
deems proper.
(b) When such person is brought before the court, a hearing shall be held to determine
if the person should be punished for contempt. If the court determines that the person is
guilty of contempt, the court may punish the person by a fine in an amount to be set by
the court or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not to exceed 30 days, or
both. The court may also order the person guilty of contempt to pay the reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the judgment creditor in the filing of the bench warrant and
the hearing thereon.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 69; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 15; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3609.   Service at place of employment. If the judgment debtor is employed in this state and
either the debtor is a nonresident of this state or the place of residence is unknown, the
order for a hearing in aid of execution and citation for contempt may be served on the
judgment debtor at the place of employment. An employer shall not unreasonably
impede or impair the service of process on an employee who is a judgment debtor.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 70; January 1, 2001.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3610.   Dormant judgment; revivor. The provisions of K.S.A. 60-2403 and 60-2404, and
amendments thereto, shall apply to judgments entered under the code of civil procedure
for limited actions.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 71; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3611.   Substitution of judgment creditor. Any person who claims to have succeeded to the
interest of the holder of a judgment by appointment as personal representative for a
judgment holder, by assignment, by operation of law, or otherwise, shall file a notice
setting forth the basis for their claim, and thereafter such successor in interest shall be
entitled to all the rights and remedies available to such successor's predecessor and may
proceed to enforce the same in such successor's own name as such successor. It shall not
be necessary to file with the clerk the documents which form the basis for the claim. If
the validity of any such transfer is disputed by any party affected thereby, the court
shall on reasonable notice to all interested parties whose whereabouts are known,
determine the respective rights and liabilities of all the parties.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 72; January 1, 2001.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3701.   Replevin; procedure; orders; execution; judgment. Upon the commencement of an
action, the plaintiff may recover possession of specific personal property before or after
judgment.
(a) Claim for possession of property. A plaintiff may seek an order to obtain possession
of specific personal property as follows: Petition. The plaintiff shall file a petition stating:
(1) Plaintiff is the owner or the person lawfully entitled to the possession, the specific
property and the factual basis for the claim;
(2) a description of the property;
(3) the property is wrongfully detained by the defendant, or is held by an officer under
legal process who has refused delivery on demand; and
(4) the estimated value of the property.
(b) Prejudgment possession of property. A plaintiff may seek an order to obtain
immediate possession of specific personal property, before judgment as follows:
Petition. The plaintiff shall file a petition signed under penalty of perjury stating:
(1) Plaintiff is the owner or the person lawfully entitled to the possession, the specific
property, and the factual basis for the claim;
(2) a description of the property;
(3) the property is wrongfully detained by the defendant, or is held by an officer under
legal process who has refused delivery on demand; and
(4) the estimated value of the property.
(c) Hearing; notice, bond. After filing the petition, the plaintiff may apply to the court
for an order for the delivery of the property prior to judgment on the merits of the case.
(1) The application to the court for an order shall be by motion which, unless made
during a hearing or trial, shall be made in writing, state with particularity the grounds
therefor and set forth the relief or order sought.
(2) The petition and application shall be served upon the defendant pursuant to K.S.A.
61-3001 through 61-3006, and amendments thereto.
(3) After a hearing and presentation of evidence on plaintiff's motion, and if the judge
is satisfied as to the probable validity of plaintiff's claim and that delivery of the
property to the plaintiff is in the interest of justice and will properly protect the interests
of all the parties, the judge may enter or cause to be entered an order for the delivery of
the property to the plaintiff.
(4) Prior to the issuance of the order for delivery of the property, the plaintiff shall file
a bond with the clerk of the court.
(d) Bond; contents, insufficiency.
(1) The bond shall be executed by the plaintiff and one or more sufficient sureties in a
sum double the amount of the fair market value of the property, as determined by the
judge, or such lesser amount as shall be approved by an order of the judge.
(2) The bond shall be to the effect that the plaintiff shall duly prosecute the action, and
pay all costs and damages that may be awarded against the plaintiff, and that if the
plaintiff is given possession of the property the plaintiff will return it to the defendant if
it be so adjudged. If the bond shall be found to be sufficient, the judge shall approve the
same and note approval thereon.
(3) The defendant may challenge the sufficiency of the bond as provided in subsection
(b) of K.S.A. 60-705, and amendments thereto.
(4) The court shall release the bond, if the plaintiff abandons the right to take
possession of the property, prior to taking possession of the property.
(e) Replevin; without hearing, notice. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
section, the judge may enter or cause to be entered the order for delivery of property
after an ex parte hearing and without notice to and the opportunity for a hearing by the
defendant, if the judge is satisfied as to the probable validity of the following additional
allegations to be contained in plaintiff's petition:
(1) Possession of the property by the plaintiff is directly necessary to secure an
important governmental or general public interest; and
(2) there is a special need for very prompt action due to the immediate danger that the
defendant will destroy or conceal the property.
(f) Property in custodia legis. If the property is in the custody of an officer under any
legal process, it shall nevertheless be subject to replevin under this section, but if the
same is in the custody of any officer under any process issued out of a judicial
proceeding, the petition and bond shall be filed in the same proceeding out of which
such process issued.
(g) Order for delivery of property. The order for the delivery of the property to the
plaintiff shall be delivered to the appropriate officer or person authorized to serve
process of any county in the state in which the property is located. The order shall state
the names of the parties, the description of the property and the value as set out in
plaintiff's petition, or as found by the court at the hearing on plaintiff's application
pursuant to subsection (c). The order shall command the appropriate officer to take
immediate possession of the property and deliver it to the plaintiff and make return of
the order on the day named therein.
(h) Execution of order, return. (1) In the execution of the order the officer may break
open any building or enclosure in which the property is located, if the officer cannot
otherwise obtain possession of the property or entrance to the building on demand.
(2) The appropriate officer shall execute the order by taking possession of the property
described therein, and serving a copy on the person charged with the order of delivery
in the same manner as for personal or resident service if the person can be found in the
county.
(3) The return day of the order of delivery shall be 14 days after it is issued, if the order
is executed within the county where the court is situated. In all other cases, the return
day shall be 21 days after the order is issued.
(4) The plaintiff shall have the right to attend execution of the order. Upon inspection
of the property the plaintiff may abandon their right to prejudgment possession and
shall so advise the appropriate officer and the court.
(i) Perishable goods. When property shall be actually seized which is likely to perish or
to materially depreciate in value or threatens to decline speedily in value before the
probable termination of the suit, or the keeping of which would be attended with
unreasonable loss or expense, the court may order the same to be sold on such terms
and conditions as the judge may direct, by the person having charge of the property, and
a return of the proceedings thereon shall be made by the person at a time to be fixed by
the judge.
(j) Redelivery, bond. The defendant, after service of a copy of the delivery order, may
apply to the court for redelivery of the property. The court shall order return of the
property to the defendant when the defendant files a bond with the clerk of the court, in
an amount equal to the plaintiff's bond, executed by the defendant with one or more
sufficient sureties. The bond shall be to the effect that the defendant will deliver the
property to the plaintiff if so adjudged, and will pay all costs and damages that may be
adjudged against the defendant. If the bond shall be found to be sufficient, the judge
shall approve the same and note approval thereon. If the defendant is a public officer,
board or government agency, such officer, board or agency, in lieu of giving a redelivery
bond, may retain possession of the property seized by filing with the clerk a response
certifying that the public health, safety or welfare would be jeopardized or impaired if
the plaintiff acquired possession of the property prior to final judgment, in which case
hearing may be had on the issue of public interest at the instance of any party.
(k) Judgment in action. (1) In an action to recover the possession of personal property,
judgment for the plaintiff may be for possession or for the recovery of possession, or the
value thereof in case a delivery cannot be had, and for damages for the detention. If the
property has been delivered to the plaintiff and the defendant claims a return thereof,
judgment for the defendant may be for a return of the property, or the value thereof in
case a return cannot be had, and damages for taking and withholding the same.
(2) In addition to other orders, the court may direct an appropriate officer to put the
party entitled to possession in possession of the property.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 73; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 215; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3702.   Foreclosure of security interest; procedure; orders; execution; judgment. A plaintiff may
bring an action to reduce an indebtedness to a money judgment and to foreclose the
security interest in specific personal property given to secure such indebtedness. The
plaintiff, at any time before judgment is rendered, may obtain immediate possession of
the specified property as follows:
(a) Petition. The plaintiff shall file a petition signed under penalty of perjury stating:
(1) The plaintiff is the secured creditor of the defendant;
(2) the instrument of indebtedness or the terms thereof;
(3) the amount of the indebtedness owed;
(4) the security agreement or the terms thereof;
(5) a description of the personal property;
(6) that plaintiff is lawfully entitled to the foreclosure of the specific personal property;
(7) the estimated value of each item of personal property; and
(8) the defendant is no longer entitled to possess the property.
(b) Prejudgment possession; hearing, notice, bond. After filing the petition, the plaintiff
may apply to the court for an order for the delivery of the property before judgment.
(1) The application to the court for an order of delivery shall be by motion which,
unless made during a hearing or trial, shall be made in writing, state with particularity
the grounds therefor and set forth the relief or order sought.
(2) The petition and application shall be served upon the defendant pursuant to K.S.A.
61-3001 through 61-3006, and amendments thereto.
(3) After a hearing and presentation of evidence on the plaintiff's motion, if the judge is
satisfied as to the probable validity of the plaintiff's claim and that delivery of the
property to the plaintiff is in the interest of justice and will properly protect the interests
of all the parties, the judge may enter or cause to be entered an order for the delivery of
the property to the plaintiff.
(4) Prior to the issuance of the order for delivery of the property, the plaintiff shall file
a bond with the clerk of the court.
(c) Bond, contents, insufficiency. (1) The bond shall be executed by the plaintiff and
one or more sufficient sureties in a sum double the amount of the fair market value of
the property, as determined by the judge, or such lesser amount as shall be approved by
an order of the judge.
(2) The bond shall be to the effect that plaintiff shall duly prosecute the action, and pay
all costs and damages that may be awarded against the plaintiff, and that if the plaintiff
is given possession of the property the plaintiff will return it to the defendant if it be so
adjudged. If the bond shall be found to be sufficient, the judge shall approve the same
and note approval thereon.
(3) The defendant may challenge the sufficiency of the bond as provided in subsection
(b) of K.S.A. 60-705, and amendments thereto.
(4) The court shall release the bond, if the plaintiff abandons the right to take
possession of the property, prior to taking possession of the property.
(d) Execution of order, return. (1) In the execution of the order the officer may break
open any building or enclosure in which the property is located, if the officer cannot
otherwise obtain possession of the property or entrance to the building on demand.
(2) The appropriate officer shall execute the order by taking possession of the property
described therein, and serving a copy on the person charged with the order of delivery
in the same manner as for personal or resident service if the person can be found in the
county.
(3) The return day of the order of delivery shall be 14 days after it is issued, if the order
is executed within the county where the court is situated. In all other cases, the return
day shall be 21 days after the order is issued.
(4) The plaintiff shall have the right to attend execution of the order. Upon inspection
of the property the plaintiff may abandon their right to prejudgment possession and
shall so advise the appropriate officer and the court.
(e) Perishable goods. When property shall be actually seized which is likely to perish or
to materially depreciate in value or threatens to decline speedily in value before the
probable termination of the suit, or the keeping of which would be attended with
unreasonable loss or expense, the court may order the same to be sold on such terms
and conditions as the judge may direct, by the person having charge of the property, and
a return of the proceedings thereon shall be made by the person at a time to be fixed by
the judge.
(f) Redelivery, bond. The defendant, after service of a copy of the delivery order, may
apply to the court for redelivery of the property. The court shall order return of the
property to the defendant when the defendant files a bond with the clerk of the court, in
an amount equal to the plaintiff's bond, executed by the defendant with one or more
sufficient sureties. The bond shall be to the effect that the defendant will deliver the
property to the plaintiff if so adjudged, and will pay all costs and damages that may be
adjudged against the defendant. If the bond shall be found to be sufficient, the judge
shall approve the same and note approval thereon. If the defendant is a public officer,
board or government agency, such officer, board or agency, in lieu of giving a redelivery
bond, may retain possession of the property seized by filing with the clerk a response
certifying that the public health, safety or welfare would be jeopardized or impaired if
the plaintiff acquired possession of the property prior to final judgment, in which case a
hearing may be had on the issue of public interest at the instance of any party.
(g) Possession in third party. When the officer finds the property in possession of a
person other than a defendant and deems it advisable to leave such person in
possession, the officer shall declare to the person in possession that such person shall
hold such property in such person's possession, subject to the further order of the court,
and shall summon such person as a garnishee by serving upon such person a copy of the
order which directs the officer to take immediate possession of the property. The court
may require of such person in possession an undertaking with good and sufficient
sureties in such sum as the court deems sufficient. The undertaking shall be to the effect
that such person will deliver the property to the officer at the time and place fixed for
sale, if such be ordered by the court. The officer shall give such person written notice of
the time and place fixed for the sale by delivery in person or by restricted mail.
(h) Property claimed by third person. If the officer, before proceeding, may require the
possession of, or be requested by the plaintiff to take possession of, personal property
claimed by any person other than a defendant, the court may require the plaintiff to
give the court an undertaking with good and sufficient sureties to pay all costs and
damages that the officer may sustain by reason of the execution of such order.
(i) Judgment. Judgment for the plaintiff shall be for a money judgment and foreclosure
of the security interest, and the plaintiff may proceed to foreclose the security interest in
accordance with the terms of the security agreement covering the property, as governed
by the provisions of the uniform commercial code, unless the court otherwise directs. If
the court directs the plaintiff to proceed to enforce such plaintiff's judgment other than
pursuant to the security agreement, and if the judgment is not satisfied within 14 days
thereafter, then the clerk shall issue an order of special execution directed to the
appropriate officer to sell the property in accordance with K.S.A. 61-3703, and
amendments thereto. If the property is not then in the possession of the officer, the
order shall also direct the person having possession to deliver such property to the
officer. If the property has been delivered to the officer, and the defendant claims a
return thereof, judgment shall be for the defendant or a return of the property and
damages for the taking and withholding of same.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 74; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 216; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3703.   Sale of property to satisfy judgment. (a) Any sale conducted under the provisions of
this section shall be subject to the provisions of K.S.A. 60-2406, and amendments thereto,
except that the disposition of proceeds after the satisfaction of senior security interests
or liens shall be made in accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. 61-3705, and
amendments thereto. The officer who shall be directed to sell the personal property,
before the officer proceeds to sell the same, shall cause public notice to be given of the
time and place of sale, at least 14 days before the day of sale. The notice shall be given
by publication at least once each week for two consecutive weeks in any newspaper
published in the county, and which is qualified to carry legal publications, or, in the
discretion of the court, by posting notices in five public places in the county, one of
which shall be on a bulletin board established for public notices in the county
courthouse. Within seven days of the date of first publication or posting of notice,
plaintiff shall send by restricted mail a copy of such notice to the defendant and to those
persons known by the plaintiff to have a security interest in the property. Such notice
shall be sent to the last known address of the person to whom sent and shall be in
compliance with K.S.A. 2025 Supp. 84-1-202(d) and (e), and amendments thereto. If the
personal property cannot be sold at the special execution sale for want of bidders, the
plaintiff may direct the officer to return the special execution showing that fact or, at the
plaintiff's option, may report the same to the judge and obtain an order permitting a
second sale under the same special execution and an extension of the return day of the
special execution if that be necessary.
(b) If the personal property to be sold shall consist of more than one item of property,
the appropriate officer conducting such sale shall sell only so much of the personal
property in the officer's custody as is necessary to satisfy the judgment, interest and
costs, and shall return the balance of any property remaining unsold to the defendant
by notifying the defendant of the time and place when same may be obtained.
(c) Neither the officer conducting the sale nor any other member of the officer's staff
may bid at any such sale.
(d) The provisions of K.S.A. 60-2411, and amendments thereto, relating to advancement
of printer's fees shall apply to this section.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 75; L. 2007, ch. 89, § 32; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 217; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3704.   Return; confirmation of sale. Upon sale of such property, the appropriate officer
shall make a return of such sale to the clerk of the court, together with an itemization of
the officer's expenses of sale. The court, upon finding the proceedings regular and in
conformity with law, shall confirm the same, and order the officer to make to the
purchaser a certificate of sale. The certificate of sale shall accurately describe the
property sold, name the purchaser and recite the facts of the sale. If a certificate of title
is obtainable for such property under the laws of this state, the description of the
property shall include the year, make, style and identification number of such property.
A certificate of sale shall vest title to the property in the purchaser.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 76; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3705.   Application of proceeds. (a) Upon the sale of personal property by the appropriate
officer, the clerk of the court shall apply the proceeds of sale in the following priority:
(1) To the court costs of the action including the officer's expenses and cost of
publication;
(2) in accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. 60-2406, and amendments thereto;
(3) in satisfaction of all judgments rendered in the action against the defendant or the
property in accordance with the priority determined by the court;
(4) any surplus shall be paid to the defendant, except that if any other security interest
holder, subsequent to the entering of the judgment of foreclosure, files with the clerk of
the court a written notification of demand furnishing reasonable proof of the security
interest holder's interest, the clerk shall withhold any payment to the defendant. Such
security interest holder shall serve the defendant with notice of the demand within 14
days after such filing and furnish proof of such notice to the court.
(b) If the defendant does not, within 14 days, notify the clerk in writing that the
defendant takes exception to the demand of such security interest holder, the clerk shall
apply the surplus to the demand and pay any balance to the defendant.
(c) If the defendant, within 14 days, notifies the clerk in writing that the defendant
takes exception to the demand, the clerk shall withhold all surplus in the clerk's
possession for a period of 30 days. If the security interest holder has not commenced a
separate action to recover the security interest holder's claim and garnished the clerk
within the time, the clerk shall pay the surplus to the defendant.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 77; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 218; July 1.
                                2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3801.   Scope. K.S.A. 61-3801 through 61-3808, and amendments thereto, shall govern
lawsuits brought to evict a person from possession of real property or of an interest in
real property.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 78; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3802.   Judgment not bar to other actions. A judgment in a lawsuit brought under K.S.A. 61-
3801 through 61-3808, and amendments thereto, shall not be a bar to any subsequent
lawsuit brought by either party for claims not included in such judgment.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 79; January 1, 2001.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3803.   Notice to leave premises. Before a lawsuit to evict a person pursuant to K.S.A. 61-
3801 through 61-3808, and amendments thereto, is filed, the party desiring to file such
lawsuit shall deliver to the other party a notice to leave the premises for which
possession is sought. The notice shall be delivered at least three days before
commencing the lawsuit, by leaving a written copy with the other party or by leaving a
copy thereof with any person over the age of 12 years residing on the premises
described in such notice, or if no such person is found upon the premises, by posting a
copy of such notice in a conspicuous place thereon, or by mailing a copy of the notice to
the other party at the address of the premises described in the notice. The three day
notice period provided for in this section shall be computed as three consecutive 24-
hour periods to commence at the time the notice is delivered, posted or mailed. If the
notice is mailed, an additional two days from the date of mailing shall be allowed for the
person to leave the premises before the lawsuit is filed. Intermediate Saturdays,
Sundays, legal holidays, and days on which the office of the clerk of the court is not
accessible shall be included in the computation of the notice period. The notice may be
combined with any notice provided for in K.S.A. 58-2540 et seq., and amendments
thereto.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 80; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 16; L. 2010, ch. 11, § 18; April 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3804.   Petition for claim. The petition shall describe the premises for which possession is
sought and why the plaintiff is seeking possession. If there is rent due for possession of
the premises, the petition may include a request for judgment for that amount or the
plaintiff may bring a subsequent lawsuit for that amount.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 81; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 17; July 1.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3805.   Summons; time for appearance. The time stated in the summons requiring the
defendant to appear in response to the petition shall be determined by the court. Such
time shall be not less than three nor more than 14 days after the date the summons is
issued.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 82; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 18; July 1.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3806.   Appearance; answer. A defendant shall either appear in person or by counsel at
the time and date set forth in the summons or file on or before such date a written
answer. The answer, when filed, shall contain the information as required under
subsection (b) of K.S.A. 61-2904, and amendments thereto.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 83; January 1, 2001.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3807.   Trial. (a) If a trial is necessary, the trial shall be conducted within 14 days after
the appearance date stated in the summons.
(b) No continuance shall be granted unless the defendant requesting a continuance
shall file a bond with good and sufficient security approved by the court, conditioned for
the payment of all damages and rent that may accrue if judgment is entered against the
defendant.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 84; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 219; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3808.   Writ of restitution. (a) If judgment is entered against the defendant for possession
of the subject premises, the court shall issue, at the request of the plaintiff, a writ of
restitution which shall direct anyone who is authorized to serve process and who is
named in the writ to place the plaintiff in possession of the premises described in the
writ.
(b) The writ of restitution shall be executed within 14 days after the person named in
the writ receives it, and that person shall file a return as with other writs under the code
of civil procedure for limited actions. The person serving the writ may use such
reasonable force as is necessary to execute the writ.
(c) If the person named in the writ receives a notice from the court that the
proceedings have been stayed by appeal, that person shall immediately delay all further
proceedings upon the execution. If the premises have been restored to the plaintiff, the
person named in the writ shall immediately place the defendant in the possession
thereof.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 85; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 19; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 220; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3901.   Grounds for appeal. Any party to a civil action pursuant to the code of civil
procedure for limited actions may appeal from:
(a) A final judgment, except a judgment rendered on confession;
(b) any order, ruling or decision which determines the action at any stage of the
proceedings;
(c) any order, ruling or decision that sustains or overrules a motion to dissolve an
attachment or to discharge a garnishment; or
(d) any order, ruling or decision that sustains or overrules a motion to vacate the levy
under an execution on property claimed to be exempt under the laws of this state.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 86; January 1, 2001.
                                2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3902. Appeals; procedure. (a) All appeals from orders, rulings, decisions or judgments of
district magistrate judges who are not regularly admitted to practice law in Kansas
under the code of civil procedure for limited actions shall be taken in the manner
provided in subsection (a) of K.S.A. 60-2103a, and amendments thereto. All appeals from
orders, rulings, decisions or judgments of district judges, or district magistrate judges
who are regularly admitted to practice law in Kansas, under the code of civil procedure
for limited actions shall be taken in the manner provided in subsections (a) and (b) of
K.S.A. 60-2103, and amendments thereto. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of
this subsection, if judgment has been rendered in an action for forcible detainer and the
defendant desires to appeal from that portion of the judgment granting restitution of the
premises, notice of appeal shall be filed within seven days after entry of judgment. The
notice of appeal shall specify the party or parties taking the appeal; the order, ruling,
decision or judgment appealed from; and the court to which the appeal is taken.
(b) The provisions of K.S.A. 60-2001, and amendments thereto, shall apply to appeals
pursuant to this section.
(c) An appeal from an action heard by a district magistrate judge who is not regularly
admitted to practice law in Kansas shall be taken to a district judge of the county. An
appeal from an action heard by a district judge, or a district magistrate judge who is
regularly admitted to practice law in Kansas, shall be taken to the court of appeals.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 87; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 221; L. 2014, ch. 71, § 9; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3903. Appeals from district magistrate judge not regularly admitted to practice law; notice;
assignment. Subject to the rules of the supreme court of this state, once an appeal is
perfected, if the judge from whom such appeal is taken is a district magistrate judge
who is not regularly admitted to practice law in Kansas, such judge shall notify the chief
judge of the judicial district that the appeal has been perfected. The chief judge then
shall assign the case to a district judge to hear the appeal.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 88; L. 2014, ch. 71, § 10; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3904.   Execution on judgment pending appeal without bond. No execution shall issue upon a
judgment, nor shall proceedings be taken for its enforcement, until the expiration of 14
days after its entry. If an appellant does not file a supersedeas bond as provided in the
code of civil procedure for limited actions, the taking of an appeal shall not operate to
stay proceedings for the enforcement of a final judgment or to take execution thereon.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting any power of a judge hearing such
appeal to stay proceedings during the pendency of an appeal, to grant an injunction
during the pendency of such appeal or to make any other appropriate order to preserve
the status quo or the effectiveness of the judgment subsequently to be rendered.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 89; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 222; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3905.   Stay of proceedings on appeal; bond. (a) Whenever an appellant entitled thereto
desires a stay on appeal from an action pursuant to the code of civil procedure for
limited actions, such appellant may present to the judge from which the appeal is taken,
for the judge's approval, a supersedeas bond which shall have such surety or sureties as
the judge requires. The bond may be given at or after the time of filing the notice of
appeal, and the stay is effective when the supersedeas bond is approved by the judge.
Such bond shall be conditioned for the satisfaction of the judgment in full together with
costs, interest and damages for delay, if for any reason the appeal is dismissed, or if the
judgment is affirmed; and to satisfy in full any modification of the judgment and such
costs, interests and damages as the appellate court may adjudge and award.
(b) When the judgment is for the recovery of money not otherwise secured, the
amount of the bond shall be fixed at such sum as will cover the whole amount of the
judgment remaining unsatisfied, costs on the appeal, interest and damages for delay,
unless the court after notice and hearing and for good cause shown fixes a different
amount or orders security other than the bond. When the judgment determines the
disposition of the property in controversy as in replevin, or when such property is in the
custody of the sheriff or when the proceeds of such property or a bond for its value is in
the custody or control of the court, the amount of the supersedeas bond shall be fixed
after notice and hearing at such sum only as will secure the amount recovered for the
use and detention of the property, the costs of the action, costs on appeal, interest and
damages for delay. When an order is made discharging, vacating or modifying a
provisional remedy, a party aggrieved thereby shall be entitled, upon application to the
judge, to have the operation of such order suspended for a period of not to exceed 14
days on condition that, within the period of 14 days, such party shall file notice of appeal
and obtain the approval of such supersedeas bond as is required under this section.
(c) In lieu of a supersedeas bond, the court may condition a stay of proceedings
pending appeal upon the timely payment into court of the periodic rent otherwise due
from the defendant to the plaintiff under the rental agreement pertaining to the real
property in issue.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 90; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 223; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3906.   Forcible detainer. In appeals taken by the defendant in actions for the forcible
detention of real property, the supersedeas bond filed on appeal shall be conditioned
that the appellant will not commit or suffer waste to be committed on the premises in
controversy, and if upon appeal the court judgment be rendered against the appellant,
the appellant will pay the value of the use and occupation of the property, from the date
such bond was filed until the delivery of the property pursuant to the judgment, and all
damages and costs that may be awarded against the appellant.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 91; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3907.   Insufficiency of bond. If a supersedeas bond was not filed with the notice of
appeal, and if the action is not yet docketed on appeal, a bond may be filed with the
court from which the appeal is taken. After the action is so docketed, application for
leave to file a bond may be made only in the appellate court. When the surety for a
supersedeas bond shall be insufficient, or such bond is insufficient in form or amount,
the appellate court may on motion order a change or renewal of such bond, and direct
that it be filed in such court.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 92; January 1, 2001.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3908.   Judgment against surety. By entering into a supersedeas bond given pursuant to
K.S.A. 61-3905 and 61-3906, and amendments thereto, the surety submits to the
jurisdiction of the court wherein the judgment becomes final, and irrevocably appoints
the clerk of such court as the surety's agent upon whom any papers affecting the
surety's liability on the bond may be served. The surety's liability may be enforced on
motion without the necessity of an independent action. The motion and such notice of
the motion as the judge prescribes may be served on the clerk of the court who shall
forthwith mail copies to the surety if the surety's address is known.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 93; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3909.   Dismissal of appeal. If the appeal is dismissed by the judge hearing such appeal,
the action shall be remanded to the judge from which such appeal was taken.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 94; January 1, 2001.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

61-4001. Docket fee; authorized only by legislative enactment; poverty affidavit; additional court
costs; exemptions. (a) Docket fee. (1) No case shall be filed or docketed pursuant to the
code of civil procedure for limited actions without the payment of a docket fee in the
amount of $35 if the amount in controversy or claimed does not exceed $500; $55 if the
amount in controversy or claimed exceeds $500 but does not exceed $5,000; or $101 if
the amount in controversy or claimed exceeds $5,000. If judgment is rendered for the
plaintiff, the court also may enter judgment for the plaintiff for the amount of the docket
fee paid by the plaintiff.
(2) Except as provided further, the docket fee established in this section shall be the
only fee collected or moneys in the nature of a fee collected for the docket fee. Such fee
shall only be established by an act of the legislature and no other authority is
established by law or otherwise to collect a fee. On and after July 1, 2019, through June
30, 2025, the supreme court may impose an additional charge, not to exceed $19 per
docket fee, to fund the costs of non-judicial personnel.
(b) Poverty affidavit; additional court costs; exemptions for the state and
municipalities. The provisions of K.S.A. 60-2001(b), (c) and (d) and 60-2005, and
amendments thereto, shall be applicable to lawsuits brought under the code of civil
procedure for limited actions.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 95; L. 2001, ch. 211, § 15; L. 2006, ch. 195, § 20; L. 2007, ch. 195,
§ 33; L. 2008, ch. 95, § 16; L. 2009, ch. 116, § 26; L. 2009, ch. 143, § 23; L. 2010, ch. 62, § 18;
L. 2011, ch. 87, § 18; L. 2012, ch. 66, § 19; L. 2013, ch. 125, § 19; L. 2015, ch. 81, § 27; L.
2017, ch. 80, § 22; L. 2019, ch. 58, § 23; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-4002.   Items allowable as costs. The provisions of K.S.A. 60-2002, 60-2003, 60-2006, 60-
2610 and 60-2611, and amendments thereto, shall be applicable to lawsuits brought
under the code of civil procedure for limited actions.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 96; January 1, 2001.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-4101.   Lost or destroyed court files. The applicable provisions of article 25 of chapter 60 of
the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and amendments thereto, relating to lost or destroyed
court files and records, shall govern lost court files and records in actions pursuant to
the code of civil procedure for limited actions, except as otherwise provided in the rules
of the supreme court of this state.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 97; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-4102.   Affirmation in lieu of oath. Whenever an oath is required by the code of civil
procedure for limited actions, the affirmation of a person conscientiously opposed to
taking an oath shall have the same effect.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 98; January 1, 2001.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-4103.   Availability of other relief. If a case arises in which an action or proceeding for the
enforcement or protection of a substantive right, or the redress or prevention of a
wrong, cannot be had under any specific provisions of the code of civil procedure for
limited actions or other statutes, then the court shall proceed as nearly in conformity
with the provisions of the code of civil procedure for limited actions as the
circumstances permit to do whatever law and justice require for the protection of the
parties.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 99; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-4104.   Effect on pending actions. The procedures prescribed by the code of civil
procedure for limited actions shall apply to any actions or proceedings commenced, or
judgments entered, prior to the enactment of this act.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 100; January 1, 2001.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1001.   Title of act; declaration of state policy and purpose. This act shall be known as the
Kansas act against discrimination. It shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of
the state for the protection of the public welfare, safety, health and peace of the people
of this state. The practice or policy of discrimination against individuals in employment
relations, in relation to free and public accommodations, in housing by reason of race,
religion, color, sex, disability, national origin or ancestry or in housing by reason of
familial status is a matter of concern to the state, since such discrimination threatens
not only the rights and privileges of the inhabitants of the state of Kansas but menaces
the institutions and foundations of a free democratic state. It is hereby declared to be
the policy of the state of Kansas to eliminate and prevent discrimination in all
employment relations, to eliminate and prevent discrimination, segregation, or
separation in all places of public accommodations covered by this act, and to eliminate
and prevent discrimination, segregation or separation in housing.
It is also declared to be the policy of this state to assure equal opportunities and
encouragement to every citizen regardless of race, religion, color, sex, disability,
national origin or ancestry, in securing and holding, without discrimination,
employment in any field of work or labor for which a person is properly qualified, to
assure equal opportunities to all persons within this state to full and equal public
accommodations, and to assure equal opportunities in housing without distinction on
account of race, religion, color, sex, disability, familial status, national origin or
ancestry. It is further declared that the opportunity to secure and to hold employment,
the opportunity for full and equal public accommodations as covered by this act and the
opportunity for full and equal housing are civil rights of every citizen.
To protect these rights, it is hereby declared to be the purpose of this act to establish and
to provide a state commission having power to eliminate and prevent segregation and
discrimination, or separation in employment, in all places of public accommodations
covered by this act, in housing because of race, religion, color, sex, disability, national
origin or ancestry and in housing because of familial status, either by employers, labor
organizations, employment agencies, realtors, financial institutions or other persons as
hereinafter provided.
History: L. 1953, ch. 249, § 1; L. 1961, ch. 248, § 1; L. 1963, ch. 279, § 1; L. 1965, ch. 323, §
1; L. 1972, ch. 194, § 1; L. 1974, ch. 209, § 1; L. 1991, ch. 147, § 1; July 1.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1002. Definitions. When used in this act:
(a) "Person" includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy or
receivers.
(b) "Employer" includes any person in this state employing four or more persons and
any person acting directly or indirectly for an employer, labor organizations,
nonsectarian corporations, organizations engaged in social service work and the state of
Kansas and all political and municipal subdivisions thereof, but shall not include a
nonprofit fraternal or social association or corporation.
(c) "Employee" does not include any individual employed by such individual's parents,
spouse or child or in the domestic service of any person.
(d) "Labor organization" includes any organization which exists for the purpose, in
whole or in part, of collective bargaining, of dealing with employers concerning
grievances, terms or conditions of employment or of other mutual aid or protection in
relation to employment.
(e) "Employment agency" includes any person or governmental agency undertaking,
with or without compensation, to procure opportunities to work or to procure, recruit,
refer or place employees.
(f) "Commission" means the Kansas human rights commission created by this act.
(g) "Unlawful employment practice" includes only those unlawful practices and acts
specified in K.S.A. 44-1009, and amendments thereto, and includes segregate or separate.
(h) "Public accommodations" means any person who caters or offers goods, services,
facilities and accommodations to the public. Public accommodations include, but are not
limited to, any lodging establishment or food service establishment, as defined by K.S.A.
36-501, and amendments thereto; any bar, tavern, barbershop, beauty parlor, theater,
skating rink, bowling alley, billiard parlor, amusement park, recreation park, swimming
pool, lake, gymnasium, mortuary or cemetery which is open to the public; or any public
transportation facility. Public accommodations do not include a religious or nonprofit
fraternal or social association or corporation.
(i) "Unlawful discriminatory practice" means: (1) Any discrimination against persons,
by reason of their race, religion, color, sex, disability, national origin or ancestry:
(A) In any place of public accommodations; or
(B) in the full and equal use and enjoyment of the services, facilities, privileges and
advantages of any institution, department or agency of the state of Kansas or any
political subdivision or municipality thereof; and
(2) any discrimination against persons in regard to membership in a nonprofit
recreational or social association or corporation by reason of race, religion, sex, color,
disability, national origin or ancestry if such association or corporation has 100 or more
members and: (A) Provides regular meal service; and (B) receives payment for dues,
fees, use of space, use of facility, services, meals or beverages, directly or indirectly,
from or on behalf of nonmembers.
This term shall not apply to a religious or private fraternal and benevolent association
or corporation.
(j) "Disability" means, with respect to an individual:
(1) A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major
life activities of such individual;
(2) a record of such an impairment; or
(3) being regarded as having such an impairment.
Disability does not include current, illegal use of a controlled substance as defined in
section 102 of the federal controlled substance act (21 U.S.C. § 802), in housing
discrimination. In employment and public accommodation discrimination, "disability"
does not include an individual who is currently engaging in the illegal use of drugs
where possession or distribution of such drugs is unlawful under the controlled
substance act (21 U.S.C. § 812), when the covered entity acts on the basis of such use.
(k) (1) "Reasonable accommodation" means:
(A) Making existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to and usable by
individuals with disabilities; and
(B) job restructuring; part-time or modified work schedules; reassignment to a vacant
position; acquisition or modification of equipment or devices; appropriate adjustment
or modifications of examinations, training materials or policies; provision of qualified
readers or interpreters; and other similar accommodations for individuals with
disabilities.
(2) A reasonable accommodation or a reasonable modification to policies, practices or
procedures need not be provided to an individual who meets the definition of disability
in K.S.A. 44-1002(j)(3), and amendments thereto.
(l) "Regarded as having such an impairment" means the absence of a physical or
mental impairment but regarding or treating an individual as though such an
impairment exists. An individual meets the requirement of "being regarded as having
such an impairment" if the individual establishes that such individual has been
subjected to an action prohibited under this act because of an actual or perceived
physical or mental impairment whether or not the impairment limits or is perceived to
limit a major life activity. Subsection (j)(3) shall not apply to impairments that are
transitory or minor. A transitory impairment is an impairment with an actual or
expected duration of six months or less.
(m) "Major life activities" means:
(1) Major life activities include, but are not limited to, caring for oneself, performing
manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, bending,
speaking, breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, and
working.
(2) It also includes the operation of a major bodily function, including, but not limited
to, functions of the immune system, normal cell growth, digestive, bowel, bladder,
neurological, brain, respiratory, circulatory, endocrine and reproductive functions.
(n) "Genetic screening or testing" means a laboratory test of a person's genes or
chromosomes for abnormalities, defects or deficiencies, including carrier status, that are
linked to physical or mental disorders or impairments, or that indicate a susceptibility
to illness, disease or other disorders, whether physical or mental, which test is a direct
test for abnormalities, defects or deficiencies, and not an indirect manifestation of
genetic disorders.
History: L. 1953, ch. 249, § 2; L. 1961, ch. 248, § 2; L. 1963, ch. 279, § 2; L. 1965, ch. 323, §
2; L. 1970, ch. 192, § 1; L. 1972, ch. 194, § 2; L. 1974, ch. 209, § 2; L. 1975, ch. 264, § 1; L.
1991, ch. 147, § 2; L. 1992, ch. 91, § 1; L. 1999, ch. 32, § 1; L. 2012, ch. 48, § 1; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1003.   Human rights commission; membership; organization compensation and expenses staff. (a)
There is hereby created the Kansas human rights commission. The commission shall
consist of seven members, two of whom shall be representative of industry, two of
whom shall be representative of labor, one of whom shall be a person authorized to
practice law in this state, one of whom shall be a representative of the real estate
industry, and one of whom shall be appointed at large, to be known as commissioners.
No more than four members of the commission shall be from the same political party.
Members of the commission shall be appointed by the governor, subject to confirmation
by the senate as provided in K.S.A. 75-4315b and amendments thereto. Except as
provided by K.S.A. 46-2601 and amendments thereto, no person appointed to the
commission shall exercise any power, duty or function as a member of the commission
until confirmed by the senate. One member shall be designated by the governor as
chairperson and shall preside at all meetings of the commission and perform all the
duties and functions of chairperson.
(b) The commission may designate one member to act as chairperson during the
absence or incapacity of the chairperson, and, when so acting, the member designated
shall have and perform all the duties and functions of the chairperson of the
commission.
(c) Except as provided by subsection (d), the term of office of each member of the
commission shall be four years and until a successor is confirmed. Any member chosen
to fill a vacancy occurring other than by expiration of term shall be appointed for the
unexpired term of the member's predecessor.
(d) The terms of members who are serving on the commission on the effective date of
this act shall expire on January 15, of the year on which such member's term would
have expired under the provisions of this section prior to amendment by this act.
Thereafter, members shall be appointed for terms of four years and until their
successors are appointed and confirmed.
(e) A majority of the current members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for
the purpose of conducting the business of the commission, except as otherwise provided
in this section. Vacancies on the commission shall not impair the right of the remaining
members to exercise all the powers of the commission.
(f) Members of the Kansas human rights commission attending meetings of the
commission, or attending a subcommittee meeting thereof authorized by the
commission, shall be paid compensation, subsistence allowances, mileage and other
expenses as provided in K.S.A. 75-3223 and amendments thereto.
(g) The commission shall employ a full-time executive director who shall be in the
unclassified service under the Kansas civil service act and who shall receive an annual
salary fixed by the commission, with the approval of the governor. The commission
shall employ such professional staff and full or part-time legal, stenographic and clerical
assistants as necessary to carry out the provisions of this act and shall fix the amount of
their compensation. The commission also may employ or may contract for the services
of qualified hearing examiners to conduct hearings. In addition, the commission may
employ or may contract for the services of qualified hearing examiners pro tem when
necessitated by the incapacity or disqualification of the other hearing examiners. All
hearing examiners shall be admitted to practice law before the supreme court of
Kansas. The appointment and compensation of legal counsel, except those members of
the legal staff serving as hearing examiners, shall be approved by the attorney general.
(h) On July 1, 1991, the commission on civil rights shall become the Kansas human
rights commission. The Kansas human rights commission shall be a continuation of the
commission on civil rights and members and employees of the commission on civil
rights shall continue as members and employees of the Kansas human rights
commission. All rules and regulations and orders of the commission on civil rights shall
be deemed rules and regulations and orders of the Kansas human rights commission. All
properties, moneys, appropriations, rights and authorities vested in the commission on
civil rights shall be vested in the Kansas human rights commission. Whenever the
commission on civil rights, or words of like effect, is referred to or designated by any
statute, contract or other document, such reference or designation shall be deemed to
apply to the Kansas human rights commission.
History: L. 1953, ch. 249, § 3; L. 1961, ch. 248, § 3; L. 1965, ch. 323, § 3; L. 1967, ch. 284, §
1; L. 1970, ch. 192, § 8; L. 1972, ch. 194, § 3; L. 1974, ch. 348, § 18; L. 1975, ch. 264, § 2; L.
1978, ch. 198, § 1; L. 1978, ch. 308, § 49; L. 1982, ch. 347, § 20; L. 1991, ch. 148, § 3; L. 1992,
ch. 116, § 28; L. 1995, ch. 247, § 1; L. 1996, ch. 250, § 1; July 1.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1004.   Powers and duties of commission. The commission shall have the following
functions, powers and duties:
(1) To establish and maintain its principal office in the city of Topeka, and such other
offices elsewhere within the state as it may deem necessary.
(2) To meet and function at any place within the state.
(3) To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind suitable rules and regulations to carry
out the provisions of this act, and the policies and practices of the commission in
connection therewith.
(4) To receive, initiate, investigate and pass upon complaints alleging discrimination in
employment, public accommodations and housing because of race, religion, color, sex,
disability, national origin or ancestry and complaints alleging discrimination in housing
because of familial status.
(5) To subpoena witnesses, compel their appearance and require the production for
examination of records, documents and other evidence or possible sources of evidence
and to examine, record and copy such materials and take and record the testimony or
statements of such persons. The commission may issue subpoenas to compel access to or
the production of such materials, or the appearance of such persons, and may issue
interrogatories to a respondent to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as
would apply if the subpoena or interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a civil
action in the district court. The commission shall have access at all reasonable times to
premises and may compel such access by application to a court of competent
jurisdiction provided that the commission first complies with the provisions of article 15
of the Kansas bill of rights and the fourth amendment to the United States constitution
relating to unreasonable searches and seizures. The commission may administer oaths
and take depositions to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as would
apply if the deposition was taken in aid of a civil action in the district court. In case of
the refusal of any person to comply with any subpoena, interrogatory or search warrant
issued hereunder, or to testify to any matter regarding which such person may be
lawfully questioned, the district court of any county may, upon application of the
commission, order such person to comply with such subpoena or interrogatory and to
testify. Failure to obey the court's order may be punished by the court as contempt. No
person shall be prosecuted or subjected to any penalty or forfeiture for or on account of
any transaction, matter or thing concerning which such person testifies or produces
evidence, except that such person so testifying shall not be exempt from prosecution
and punishment for perjury committed in so testifying. The immunity herein provided
shall extend only to natural persons.
(6) To act in concert with other parties in interest in order to eliminate and prevent
discrimination and segregation, prohibited by this act, by including any term in a
conciliation agreement as could be included in a final order under this act.
(7) To apply to the district court of the county where the respondent resides or
transacts business for enforcement of any conciliation agreement by seeking specific
performance of such agreement.
(8) To issue such final orders after a public hearing as may remedy any existing
situation found to violate this act and prevent its recurrence.
(9) To endeavor to eliminate prejudice among the various ethnic groups and people
with disabilities in this state and to further good will among such groups. The
commission in cooperation with the state department of education shall prepare a
comprehensive educational program designed for the students of the public schools of
this state and for all other residents thereof, calculated to emphasize the origin of
prejudice against such groups, its harmful effects and its incompatibility with American
principles of equality and fair play.
(10) To create such advisory agencies and conciliation councils, local, regional or
statewide, as in its judgment will aid in effectuating the purposes of this act; to study the
problem of discrimination in all or specific fields or instances of discrimination because
of race, religion, color, sex, disability, national origin or ancestry; to foster, through
community effort or otherwise, good will, cooperation and conciliation among the
groups and elements of the population of this state; and to make recommendations to
the commission for the development of policies and procedures, and for programs of
formal and informal education, which the commission may recommend to the
appropriate state agency. Such advisory agencies and conciliation councils shall be
composed of representative citizens serving without pay. The commission may itself
make the studies and perform the acts authorized by this paragraph. It may, by
voluntary conferences with parties in interest, endeavor by conciliation and persuasion
to eliminate discrimination in all the stated fields and to foster good will and
cooperation among all elements of the population of the state.
(11) To accept contributions from any person to assist in the effectuation of this section
and to seek and enlist the cooperation of private, charitable, religious, labor, civic and
benevolent organizations for the purposes of this section.
(12) To issue such publications and such results of investigation and research as in its
judgment will tend to promote good will and minimize or eliminate discrimination
because of race, religion, color, sex, disability, national origin or ancestry.
(13) To render each year to the governor and to the state legislature a full written
report of all of its activities and of its recommendations.
(14) To adopt an official seal.
(15) To receive and accept federal funds to effectuate the purposes of the act and to
enter into agreements with any federal agency for such purpose.
History: L. 1953, ch. 249, § 4; L. 1961, ch. 248, § 4; L. 1963, ch. 279, § 3; L. 1965, ch. 323, §
4; L. 1967, ch. 285, § 1; L. 1970, ch. 192, § 2; L. 1972, ch. 194, § 4; L. 1974, ch. 209, § 3; L.
1975, ch. 264, § 3; L. 1991, ch. 147, § 3; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1005.   Complaints; investigation; proceedings; remedial orders; dismissal of certain complaints,
when, procedure and effect. (a) Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged unlawful
employment practice or by an alleged unlawful discriminatory practice, and who can
articulate a prima facie case pursuant to a recognized legal theory of discrimination,
may, personally or by an attorney-at-law, make, sign and file with the commission a
verified complaint in writing, articulating the prima facie case, which shall also state the
name and address of the person, employer, labor organization or employment agency
alleged to have committed the unlawful employment practice complained of or the
name and address of the person alleged to have committed the unlawful discriminatory
practice complained of, and which shall set forth the particulars thereof and contain
such other information as may be required by the commission.
(b) The commission upon its own initiative or the attorney general may, in like
manner, make, sign and file such complaint. Whenever the attorney general has
sufficient reason to believe that any person as herein defined is engaged in a practice of
discrimination, segregation or separation in violation of this act, the attorney general
may make, sign and file a complaint. Any employer whose employees or some of whom,
refuse or threaten to refuse to cooperate with the provisions of this act, may file with the
commission a verified complaint asking for assistance by conciliation or other remedial
action.
(c) Whenever any problem of discrimination because of race, religion, color, sex,
disability, national origin or ancestry arises, or whenever the commission has, in its own
judgment, reason to believe that any person has engaged in an unlawful employment
practice or an unlawful discriminatory practice in violation of this act, or has engaged in
a pattern or practice of discrimination, the commission may conduct an investigation
without filing a complaint and shall have the same powers during such investigation as
provided for the investigation of complaints. The person to be investigated shall be
advised of the nature and scope of such investigation prior to its commencement. The
purpose of the investigation shall be to resolve any such problems promptly. In the
event such problems cannot be resolved within a reasonable time, the commission may
issue a complaint whenever the investigation has revealed a violation of the Kansas act
against discrimination has occurred. The information gathered in the course of the first
investigation may be used in processing the complaint.
(d) After the filing of any complaint by an aggrieved individual, by the commission, or
by the attorney general, the commission shall, within seven days after the filing of the
complaint, serve a copy on each of the parties alleged to have violated this act, and shall
designate one of the commissioners to make, with the assistance of the commission's
staff, prompt investigation of the alleged act of discrimination. If the commissioner shall
determine after such investigation that no probable cause exists for crediting the
allegations of the complaint, such commissioner, within 10 business days from such
determination, shall cause to be issued and served upon the complainant and
respondent written notice of such determination.
(e) If such commissioner after such investigation, shall determine that probable cause
exists for crediting the allegations for the complaint, the commissioner or such other
commissioner as the commission may designate, shall immediately endeavor to
eliminate the unlawful employment practice or the unlawful discriminatory practice
complained of by conference and conciliation. The complainant, respondent and
commission shall have 45 days from the date respondent is notified in writing of a
finding of probable cause to enter into a conciliation agreement signed by all parties in
interest. The parties may amend a conciliation agreement at any time prior to the date
of entering into such agreement. Upon agreement by the parties the time for entering
into such agreement may be extended. The members of the commission and its staff
shall not disclose what has transpired in the course of such endeavors.
(f) In case of failure to eliminate such practices by conference and conciliation, or in
advance thereof, if in the judgment of the commissioner or the commission
circumstances so warrant, the commissioner or the commission shall commence a
hearing in accordance with the provisions of the Kansas administrative procedure act
naming as parties the complainant and the person, employer, labor organization,
employment agency, realtor or financial institution named in such complaint,
hereinafter referred to as respondent. A copy of the complaint shall be served on the
respondent. At least four commissioners or a presiding officer from the office of
administrative hearings shall be designated as the presiding officer. The place of such
hearing shall be in the county where respondent is doing business and the acts
complained of occurred.
(g) The complainant or respondent may apply to the presiding officer for the issuance
of a subpoena for the attendance of any person or the production or examination of any
books, records or documents pertinent to the proceeding at the hearing. Upon such
application the presiding officer shall issue such subpoena.
(h) The case in support of the complaint shall be presented before the presiding officer
by one of the commission's attorneys or agents, or by private counsel, if any, of the
complainant, and the commissioner who shall have previously made the investigation
shall not participate in the hearing except as a witness. Any endeavors at conciliation
shall not be received in evidence.
(i) Any complaint filed pursuant to this act must be so filed within six months after the
alleged act of discrimination, unless the act complained of constitutes a continuing
pattern or practice of discrimination in which event it will be from the last act of
discrimination. Complaints filed with the commission may be dismissed by the
commission on its own initiative, and shall be dismissed by the commission upon the
written request of the complainant, if the commission has not issued a finding of
probable cause or no probable cause or taken other administrative action dismissing the
complaint within 300 days of the filing of the complaint. The commission shall mail
written notice to all parties of dismissal of a complaint within five days of dismissal. Any
such dismissal of a complaint in accordance with this section shall constitute final action
by the commission which shall be deemed to exhaust all administrative remedies under
the Kansas act against discrimination for the purpose of allowing subsequent filing of
the matter in court by the complainant, without the requirement of filing a petition for
reconsideration pursuant to K.S.A. 44-1010, and amendments thereto. Dismissal of a
complaint in accordance with this section shall not be subject to appeal or judicial
review by any court under the provisions of K.S.A. 44-1011, and amendments thereto.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to complaints alleging discriminatory
housing practices filed with the commission pursuant to K.S.A. 44-1015 et seq., and
amendments thereto.
(j) The respondent may file a written verified answer to the complaint and appear at
such hearing in person or otherwise, with or without counsel, and submit testimony.
The complainant shall appear at such hearing in person, with or without counsel, and
submit testimony. The presiding officer or the complainant shall have the power
reasonably and fairly to amend any complaint, and the respondent shall have like
power to amend such respondent's answer. The presiding officer shall be bound by the
rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity, and only relevant evidence of
reasonable probative value shall be received.
(k) If the presiding officer finds a respondent has engaged in or is engaging in any
unlawful employment practice or unlawful discriminatory practice as defined in this
act, the presiding officer shall render an order requiring such respondent to cease and
desist from such unlawful employment practice or such unlawful discriminatory
practice and to take such affirmative action, including but not limited to the hiring,
reinstatement, or upgrading of employees, with or without back pay, and the admission
or restoration to membership in any respondent labor organizations; the admission to
and full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, and accommodations
offered by any respondent place of public accommodation denied in violation of this act,
as, in the judgment of the presiding officer, will effectuate the purposes of this act, and
including a requirement for report of the manner of compliance. Such order may also
include an award of damages for pain, suffering and humiliation which are incidental to
the act of discrimination, except that an award for such pain, suffering and humiliation
shall in no event exceed the sum of $2,000.
(l) Any state, county or municipal agency may pay a complainant back pay if it has
entered into a conciliation agreement for such purposes with the commission, and may
pay such back pay if it is ordered to do so by the commission.
(m) If the presiding officer finds that a respondent has not engaged in any such
unlawful employment practice, or any such unlawful discriminatory practice, the
presiding officer shall render an order dismissing the complaint as to such respondent.
(n) The commission shall review an initial order rendered under subsection (k) or (m).
In addition to the parties, a copy of any final order shall be served on the attorney
general and such other public officers as the commission may deem proper.
(o) The commission shall, except as otherwise provided, establish rules of practice to
govern, expedite and effectuate the foregoing procedure and its own actions
thereunder. The rules of practice shall be available, upon written request, within 30
days after the date of adoption.
History: L. 1953, ch. 249, § 5; L. 1961, ch. 248, § 6; L. 1963, ch. 279, § 4; L. 1965, ch. 323, §
5; L. 1967, ch. 285, § 2; L. 1970, ch. 192, § 3; L. 1972, ch. 194, § 5; L. 1974, ch. 209, § 4; L.
1975, ch. 264, § 4; L. 1984, ch. 186, § 1; L. 1988, ch. 356 § 149; L. 1989, ch. 283, § 9; L. 1991,
ch. 147, § 4; L. 1995, ch. 247, § 2; L. 2004, ch. 145, § 15; July 1, 2007.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1006. Construction of act. (a) The provisions of this act shall be construed liberally for
the accomplishment of the purposes thereof. Nothing contained in this act shall be
deemed to repeal any of the provisions of any other law of this state relating to
discrimination because of race, religion, color, sex, disability, national origin or
ancestry, unless the same is specifically repealed by this act.
(b) Nothing in this act shall be construed to mean that an employer shall be forced to
hire unqualified or incompetent personnel, or discharge qualified or competent
personnel.
(c) The definition of "disability" in K.S.A. 44-1002(j), and amendments thereto, shall be
construed in accordance with the following:
(1) The definition of disability in this act shall be construed in favor of broad coverage
of individuals under this act, to the maximum extent permitted by the terms of this act;
(2) an impairment that substantially limits one major life activity need not limit other
major life activities in order to be considered a disability;
(3) an impairment that is episodic or in remission is a disability if it would
substantially limit a major life activity when active; and
(4) (A) The determination of whether an impairment substantially limits a major life
activity shall be made without regard to the ameliorative effects of mitigating measures
such as the following:
(i) Medication, medical supplies, equipment, or appliances, low-vision devices (which
do not include ordinary eye glasses or contact lenses), prosthetics including limbs and
devices, hearing aids and cochlear implants or other implantable hearing devices,
mobility devices, or oxygen therapy equipment and supplies;
(ii) use of assistive technology;
(iii) reasonable accommodations or auxiliary aides or services; or
(iv) learned behavioral or adaptive neurological modifications.
(B) The ameliorative effects of the mitigating measures of ordinary eyeglasses or
contact lenses shall be considered in determining whether an impairment substantially
limits a major life activity.
(C) As used in this subparagraph:
(i) "Ordinary eyeglasses or contact lenses" means lenses that are intended to fully
correct visual acuity or eliminate refractive error; and
(ii) "low-vision devices" means devices that magnify, enhance, or otherwise augment a
visual image.
History: L. 1953, ch. 249, § 6; L. 1963, ch. 279, § 5; L. 1970, ch. 192, § 4; L. 1972, ch. 194, §
6; L. 1974, ch. 209, § 5; L. 1991, ch. 147, § 5; L. 2012, ch. 48, § 2; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1007.   Invalidity of part. If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this act or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances shall for any reason be adjudged by
a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid such judgment shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder of this act and the application thereof to other persons or
circumstances but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph
or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have
been rendered and the persons or circumstances involved. It is hereby declared to be
the legislative intent that this act would have been adopted had such provisions not
been included.
History: L. 1953, ch. 249, § 7; June 30.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1009.   Unlawful employment practices; unlawful discriminatory practices. (a) It shall be an
unlawful employment practice:
(1) For an employer, because of the race, religion, color, sex, disability, national origin
or ancestry of any person to refuse to hire or employ such person to bar or discharge
such person from employment or to otherwise discriminate against such person in
compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment; to limit, segregate,
separate, classify or make any distinction in regards to employees; or to follow any
employment procedure or practice which, in fact, results in discrimination, segregation
or separation without a valid business necessity.
(2) For a labor organization, because of the race, religion, color, sex, disability, national
origin or ancestry of any person, to exclude or to expel from its membership such
person or to discriminate in any way against any of its members or against any
employer or any person employed by an employer.
(3) For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to print or circulate or
cause to be printed or circulated any statement, advertisement or publication, or to use
any form of application for employment or membership or to make any inquiry in
connection with prospective employment or membership, which expresses, directly or
indirectly, any limitation, specification or discrimination as to race, religion, color, sex,
disability, national origin or ancestry, or any intent to make any such limitation,
specification or discrimination, unless based on a bona fide occupational qualification.
(4) For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to discharge, expel or
otherwise discriminate against any person because such person has opposed any
practices or acts forbidden under this act or because such person has filed a complaint,
testified or assisted in any proceeding under this act.
(5) For an employment agency to refuse to list and properly classify for employment or
to refuse to refer any person for employment or otherwise discriminate against any
person because of such person's race, religion, color, sex, disability, national origin or
ancestry; or to comply with a request from an employer for a referral of applicants for
employment if the request expresses, either directly or indirectly, any limitation,
specification or discrimination as to race, religion, color, sex, disability, national origin
or ancestry.
(6) For an employer, labor organization, employment agency, or school which
provides, coordinates or controls apprenticeship, on-the-job, or other training or
retraining program, to maintain a practice of discrimination, segregation or separation
because of race, religion, color, sex, disability, national origin or ancestry, in admission,
hiring, assignments, upgrading, transfers, promotion, layoff, dismissal, apprenticeship
or other training or retraining program, or in any other terms, conditions or privileges
of employment, membership, apprenticeship or training; or to follow any policy or
procedure which, in fact, results in such practices without a valid business motive.
(7) For any person, whether an employer or an employee or not, to aid, abet, incite,
compel or coerce the doing of any of the acts forbidden under this act, or attempt to do
so.
(8) For an employer, labor organization, employment agency or joint labor-
management committee to: (A) Limit, segregate or classify a job applicant or employee
in a way that adversely affects the opportunities or status of such applicant or employee
because of the disability of such applicant or employee; (B) participate in a contractual
or other arrangement or relationship, including a relationship with an employment or
referral agency, labor union, an organization providing fringe benefits to an employee
or an organization providing training and apprenticeship programs that has the effect
of subjecting a qualified applicant or employee with a disability to the discrimination
prohibited by this act; (C) utilize standards criteria, or methods of administration that
have the effect of discrimination on the basis of disability or that perpetuate the
discrimination of others who are subject to common administrative control; (D) exclude
or otherwise deny equal jobs or benefits to a qualified individual because of the known
disability of an individual with whom the qualified individual is known to have a
relationship or association; (E) not make reasonable accommodations to the known
physical or mental limitations of an otherwise qualified individual with a disability who
is an applicant or employee, unless such employer, labor organization, employment
agency or joint labor-management committee can demonstrate that the accommodation
would impose an undue hardship on the operation of the business thereof; (F) deny
employment opportunities to a job applicant or employee who is an otherwise qualified
individual with a disability, if such denial is based on the need to make reasonable
accommodation to the physical or mental impairments of the employee or applicant; (G)
use qualification standards, employment tests or other selection criteria that screen out
or tend to screen out an individual with a disability or a class of individuals with
disabilities unless the standard, test or other selection criteria, as used, is shown to be
job-related for the position in question and is consistent with business necessity; or (H)
fail to select and administer tests concerning employment in the most effective manner
to ensure that, when such test is administered to a job applicant or employee who has a
disability that impairs sensory, manual or speaking skills, the test results accurately
reflect the skills, aptitude or whatever other factor of such applicant or employee that
such test purports to measure, rather than reflecting the impaired sensory, manual or
speaking skills of such employee or applicant (except where such skills are the factors
that the test purports to measure).
(9) For any employer to:
(A) Seek to obtain, to obtain or to use genetic screening or testing information of an
employee or a prospective employee to distinguish between or discriminate against or
restrict any right or benefit otherwise due or available to an employee or a prospective
employee; or
(B) subject, directly or indirectly, any employee or prospective employee to any genetic
screening or test.
(b) It shall not be an unlawful employment practice to fill vacancies in such way as to
eliminate or reduce imbalance with respect to race, religion, color, sex, disability,
national origin or ancestry.
(c) It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice:
(1) For any person, as defined herein being the owner, operator, lessee, manager,
agent or employee of any place of public accommodation to refuse, deny or make a
distinction, directly or indirectly, in offering its goods, services, facilities, and
accommodations to any person as covered by this act because of race, religion, color,
sex, disability, national origin or ancestry, except where a distinction because of sex is
necessary because of the intrinsic nature of such accommodation.
(2) For any person, whether or not specifically enjoined from discriminating under
any provisions of this act, to aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any of the
acts forbidden under this act, or to attempt to do so.
(3) For any person, to refuse, deny, make a distinction, directly or indirectly, or
discriminate in any way against persons because of the race, religion, color, sex,
disability, national origin or ancestry of such persons in the full and equal use and
enjoyment of the services, facilities, privileges and advantages of any institution,
department or agency of the state of Kansas or any political subdivision or municipality
thereof.
History: L. 1961, ch. 248, § 5; L. 1965, ch. 323, § 6; L. 1970, ch. 192, § 5; L. 1972, ch. 194, §
7; L. 1974, ch. 209, § 6; L. 1991, ch. 147, § 6; L. 1999, ch. 32, § 2; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1010.   Petition for reconsideration of orders of commission. Any party being dissatisfied with
any order or decision of the commission may petition for reconsideration in accordance
with the provisions of K.S.A. 77-529 and amendments thereto. No cause of action arising
out of any order or decision of the commission shall accrue in any court to any party
unless such party shall petition for reconsideration as herein provided. No party shall,
in any court, urge or rely upon any ground not set forth in the petition for
reconsideration.
History: L. 1961, ch. 248, § 7; L. 1988, ch. 356, § 150; July 1, 1989.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1011.   Enforcement of commission orders; judicial review; procedure. (a) The commission,
attorney general or county or district attorney, at the request of the commission, may
secure enforcement of any final order of the commission in accordance with the Kansas
judicial review act. The evidence presented to the commission, together with its findings
and the order issued thereon, shall be certified by the commission to the district court as
its return. No order of the commission shall be superseded or stayed during the
proceeding on review unless the district court shall so direct.
(b) Any action of the commission pursuant to the Kansas act against discrimination is
subject to review in accordance with the Kansas judicial review act except: (1) As
provided by K.S.A. 44-1044, and amendments thereto; (2) the attorney general or county
or district attorney, in addition to those persons specified by K.S.A. 77-611, and
amendments thereto, shall have standing to bring an action for review; and (3) on
review, the court shall hear the action by trial de novo with or without a jury in
accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. 60-238, and amendments thereto, and the court,
in its discretion, may permit any party or the commission to submit additional evidence
on any issue. The review shall be heard and determined by the court as expeditiously as
possible. After hearing, the court may affirm the adjudication. If the adjudication by the
commission is not affirmed, the court may set aside or modify it, in whole or in part, or
may remand the proceedings to the commission for further disposition in accordance
with the order of the court.
The commission's copy of the testimony shall be available at all reasonable times to all
parties for examination without cost, and for the purpose of judicial review of the order.
The review shall be heard on the record without requirement of printing.
The commission shall be deemed a party to the review of any order by the court.
History: L. 1961, ch. 248, § 8; L. 1963, ch. 279, § 6; L. 1965, ch. 323, § 7; L. 1967, ch. 285, §
3; L. 1970, ch. 192, § 6; L. 1979, ch. 161, § 3; L. 1986, ch. 318, § 64; L. 2010, ch. 17, § 79; July
1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1012.   Posting of law and information. Every person, as defined herein, employer,
employment agency and labor union subject to this act, shall keep posted in a
conspicuous place or places on his premises a notice or notices to be prepared or
approved by the commission, which shall set forth excerpts of this act and such other
relevant information which the commission shall deem necessary to explain the act.
History: L. 1961, ch. 248, § 9; L. 1963, ch. 279, § 7; L. 1965, ch. 323, § 8; June 30.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1013.   Unlawful acts; penalties. Any person, as defined herein, employer, labor
organization or employment agency, who or which shall willfully resist, prevent,
impede or interfere with the commission or any of its members or representatives in the
performance of duty under this act, or shall willfully violate an order of the commission,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by
imprisonment for not more than one (1) year, or by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500), or by both such fine and imprisonment; but procedure for the review of
the order shall not be deemed to be such willful conduct.
History: L. 1961, ch. 248, § 10; L. 1965, ch. 323, § 9; L. 1970, ch. 192, § 7; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1015.   Discrimination in housing; definitions. As used in this act, unless the context
otherwise requires:
(a) "Commission" means the Kansas human rights commission.
(b) "Real property" means and includes:
(1) All vacant or unimproved land; and
(2) any building or structure which is occupied or designed or intended for occupancy,
or any building or structure having a portion thereof which is occupied or designed or
intended for occupancy.
(c) "Family" includes a single individual.
(d) "Person" means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, labor
organization, legal representative, mutual company, joint-stock company, trust,
unincorporated organization, trustee, trustee in bankruptcy, receiver and fiduciary.
(e) "To rent" means to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
(f) "Discriminatory housing practice" means any act that is unlawful under K.S.A. 44-
1016, 44-1017 or 44-1026, and amendments thereto.
(g) "Person aggrieved" means any person who claims to have been injured by a
discriminatory housing practice or believes that such person will be injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.
(h) "Disability" has the meaning provided by K.S.A. 44-1002 and amendments thereto.
(i) "Familial status" means having one or more individuals less than 18 years of age
domiciled with:
(1) A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals;
or
(2) the designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written
permission of such parent or other person.
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 1; L. 1991, ch. 147, § 7; L. 1992, ch. 91, § 2; April 23.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1016.   Same; unlawful acts in connection with sale or rental of real property. Subject to the
provisions of K.S.A. 44-1018 and amendments thereto, it shall be unlawful for any
person:
(a) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, to fail to transmit a
bona fide offer or refuse to negotiate in good faith for the sale or rental of, or otherwise
make unavailable or deny, real property to any person because of race, religion, color,
sex, disability, familial status, national origin or ancestry.
(b) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or
rental of real property, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection
therewith, because of race, religion, color, sex, disability, familial status, national origin
or ancestry.
(c) To make, print, publish, disseminate or use, or cause to be made, printed,
published, disseminated or used, any notice, statement, advertisement or application,
with respect to the sale or rental of real property that indicates any preference,
limitation, specification or discrimination based on race, religion, color, sex, disability,
familial status, national origin or ancestry, or an intention to make any such preference,
limitation, specification or discrimination.
(d) To represent to any person because of race, religion, color, sex, disability, familial
status, national origin or ancestry that any real property is not available for inspection,
sale or rental when such real property is in fact so available.
(e) For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any real
property by representation regarding the entry or prospective entry into the
neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, religion, color, sex, disability,
familial status, national origin or ancestry.
(f) To deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing
service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility
relating to the business of selling or renting real property, or to discriminate against
such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation,
because of race, religion, color, sex, disability, familial status, national origin or
ancestry.
(g) To discriminate against any person in such person's use or occupancy of real
property because of the race, religion, color, sex, disability, familial status, national
origin or ancestry of the people with whom such person associates.
(h) (1) To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny,
residential real property to any buyer or renter because of a disability of:
(A) That buyer or renter;
(B) a person residing in or intending to reside in such real property after it is sold,
rented or made available; or
(C) any person associated with that buyer or renter.
(2) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or
rental of residential real property or in the provision of services or facilities in
connection with such real property because of a disability of:
(A) That person;
(B) a person residing in or intending to reside in that real property after it is so sold,
rented or made available; or
(C) any person associated with that person.
(3) For purposes of this subsection (h), discrimination includes:
(A) A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with a disability, reasonable
modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such
modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises;
(B) a refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or
services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal
opportunity to use and enjoy residential real property; or
(C) in connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily residential
real property for first occupancy on and after January 1, 1992, a failure to design and
construct such residential real property in such a manner that:
(i) The public use and common use portions of such residential real property are
readily accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities;
(ii) all the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such
residential real property are sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons with
disabilities who are in wheelchairs; and
(iii) all premises within such residential real property contain the following features of
adaptive design: An accessible route into and through the residential real property; light
switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in accessible
locations; reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and
usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver
about the space.
(4) Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American national standard
for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for physically
handicapped people, commonly cited as "ANSI A 117.1," suffices to satisfy the
requirements of subsection (h)(3)(C)(iii).
(5) As used in this subsection (h), "covered multifamily residential real property"
means:
(A) Buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings have one or more
elevators; and
(B) ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units.
(6) Nothing in this act shall be construed to invalidate or limit any state law or
ordinance that requires residential real property to be designed and constructed in a
manner that affords persons with disabilities greater access than is required by this act.
(7) Nothing in this subsection (h) requires that residential real property be made
available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health
or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical
damage to the property of others.
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 2; L. 1972, ch. 194, § 8; L. 1991, ch. 147, § 8; L. 1992, ch. 142, §
1; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1017.   Same; unlawful acts as to real estate loans. (a) It shall be unlawful for any person or
other entity whose business includes engaging in real estate related transactions to
discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in the terms
or conditions of such a transaction, because of the race, religion, color, sex, disability,
familial status, national origin or ancestry of such person or of any person associated
with such person in connection with any real estate related transaction.
(b) As used in this section, "real estate related transaction" means any of the following:
(1) The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance:
(A) For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or
(B) secured by real property.
(2) The selling, brokering or appraising of real property.
(c) Nothing in this section prohibits a person engaged in the business of furnishing
appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other than race, religion,
color, sex, disability, familial status, national origin or ancestry.
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 3; L. 1972, ch. 194, § 9; L. 1991, ch. 147, § 9; January 1, 1992.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1017a. Homeowners association; removal of certain restrictive covenants; penalties. (a) No
declaration or other governing document of an association shall include a restrictive
covenant in violation of K.S.A. 44-1016 and 44-1017, and amendments thereto.
(b) Within 60 days of the effective date of this act, the board of directors of an
association shall amend any declaration or other governing document that includes a
restrictive covenant in violation of K.S.A. 44-1016 and 44-1017, and amendments thereto,
by removing such restrictive covenant. Such amendment shall not require the approval
of the members of the association. No other change shall be required to be made to the
declaration or other governing document of the association pursuant to this section.
Within 10 days of the adoption of the amendment, the amended declaration or other
governing document shall be recorded in the same manner as the original declaration
or other governing document and shall be subject to recording fees pursuant to K.S.A.
28-115, and amendments thereto.
(c) If the commission, a city or county where the association is located provides written
notice to an association requesting that the association delete a restrictive covenant in
violation of K.S.A. 44-1016 and 44-1017, and amendments thereto, the association shall
delete the restrictive covenant within 30 days of receiving the notice. If the association
fails to delete the restrictive covenant in violation of K.S.A. 44-1016 and 44-1017, and
amendments thereto, the commission, a city or county where the association is located,
or any person adversely affected by such restrictive covenant may bring an action
against the homeowners association for injunctive relief to enforce the provisions of
subsections (a) and (b). The court may award attorney's fees to the prevailing party.
(d) If a city or county determines that the association is no longer active such that the
written notice described in subsection (c) cannot be provided to the association, then the
city or county, upon adoption of a resolution by the governing body of such city or
county, may remove such restrictive covenant that is in violation of K.S.A. 44-1016 or 44-
1017, and amendments thereto, by recording a certificate of release of prohibited
covenants in accordance with K.S.A. 58-2274, and amendments thereto. A resolution
may authorize the removal of more than one restrictive covenant that is in violation of
K.S.A. 44-1016 or 44-1017, and amendments thereto. No signature or other consent of
any property owner affected by such recording shall be required to record any
certificate of release of prohibited covenants pursuant to this subsection. Any such
certificate recorded pursuant to this subsection shall not affect the validity of any
property interest recorded within the original or redacted plat. No city or county shall
incur any liability arising from the recording of any certificate of release of prohibited
covenants pursuant to this subsection. No fee shall be charged for any recording filed
pursuant to this subsection. Any such recording shall be exempt from the survey
requirements of K.S.A. 58-2001 et seq., and amendments thereto.
(e) For the purposes of this section:
(1) "Association" means a non-profit homeowners association as defined in K.S.A. 60-
3611, and amendments thereto.
(2) "Commission" means the Kansas human rights commission as defined in K.S.A. 44-
1002, and amendments thereto.
(f) This section shall be a part of and supplemental to the Kansas act against
discrimination.
History:   L. 2006, ch. 144, § 1; L. 2024, ch. 63, § 16; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1018.   Same; application of act. (a) Nothing in this act shall prohibit a religious
organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of real property which
it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion,
or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is
restricted on account of race, color, national origin or ancestry. Nor shall anything in
this act prohibit a nonprofit private club in fact not open to the public, which as an
incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates
for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such
lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members.
(b) Nothing in this act, other than the prohibitions against discriminatory advertising
as provided in subsection (c) of K.S.A. 44-1016 and amendments thereto, shall apply to:
(1) The sale or rental of any single family house by an owner, provided the following
conditions are met:
(A) The owner does not own or have any interest in more than three single family
houses at any one time; and
(B) the house is sold or rented without the use of a real estate broker, agent or
salesperson or the facilities of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings.
If the owner selling the house does not reside in it at the time of the sale or was not the
most recent resident of the house prior to such sale, the exemption in this subsection
applies to only one such sale in any 24-month period; or
(2) rooms or units in buildings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be
occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner
actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as the owner's residence.
(c) (1) Nothing in this act limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state or
federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a
dwelling. Nor does any provision in this act regarding familial status apply with respect
to dwellings provided under any state or federal program specifically designed and
operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program, or to
housing for older persons.
(2) As used in this subsection (c), "housing for older persons" means housing
communities:
(A) Intended for, and at least 80% occupied by, at least one person 55 years of age or
older per unit and providing significant facilities and services specifically designed to
meet the physical or social needs of such persons; or
(B) intended for and occupied solely by persons 62 years of age or older.
(d) Nothing in this act prohibits conduct against a person because such person has
been convicted two or more times by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in section 102 of the
federal controlled substances act (21 U.S.C. 802).
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 4; L. 1991, ch. 147, § 10; L. 1992, ch. 142, § 2; July 1.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1019.   Same; complaints; referral to local authority, when; investigation; administrative
proceedings; election to file action in court; administrative remedial orders. (a) The authority and
responsibility for administering this act shall be in the commission. Any person
aggrieved may file a verified complaint with the commission. Such complaints shall be
in writing, shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing
practice are based and shall contain such other information and be in such form as the
commission may require. Complaints must be filed within one year after the alleged
discriminatory housing practice occurred, but may be reasonably and fairly amended at
any time. The commission upon its own initiative or the attorney general may, in like
manner, make, sign and file such complaint. A respondent may file a verified answer to
the complaint against the respondent and with the leave of the commission, which shall
be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend the answer
filed by the respondent at any time.
(b) Upon receipt of any such complaint the commission shall serve notice upon the
aggrieved person acknowledging such filing and advising the aggrieved person of the
time limits and choice of forums provided under this act; and the commission shall
within 10 days thereof serve on the respondent a notice identifying the alleged
discriminatory housing practice and advising such respondent of the procedural rights
and obligations of respondents under this act, together with a copy of the original
complaint. Service of the notice shall be made in the manner prescribed by the code of
civil procedure.
(c) Whenever a local fair housing ordinance provides rights and remedies for alleged
discriminatory housing practices which are, in the judgment of the commission,
substantially equivalent to the rights and remedies provided in this act, the commission
shall refer to the appropriate local agency any complaint filed under this act which
appears to constitute a violation of such local fair housing ordinance. The commission
shall take no further action with respect to such complaint until 30 days have elapsed
since the complaint was referred to the local agency, or the local agency has completed
its investigation, or the local agency requests the commission to assume jurisdiction or
to assist it, whichever occurs first. The local agency shall inform the commission in
writing of the status of the referred complaint at the end of the referral period or when
the local agency has completed its investigation, whichever occurs first. The commission
may take further action on the complaint if in its judgment the protection of the rights of
the parties or the interests of justice require such action.
(d) A person who is not named as a respondent in a complaint, but who is identified as
a respondent in the course of investigation, may be joined as an additional or substitute
respondent upon written notice, under subsections (a) and (b), to such person, from the
commission.
(e) (1) If a complaint is not referred to a local agency as provided in subsection (b), or
after the commission assumes jurisdiction of a complaint following such referral, the
commission shall promptly commence an investigation thereof, in the manner provided
in K.S.A. 44-1005, and amendments thereto, for investigating complaints of violations of
the Kansas act against discrimination, and complete such investigation, including
conciliation, within 100 days after the filing of the complaint or, when the commission
takes further action under subsection (c), within 100 days after the commission assumes
jurisdiction of a complaint, unless it is impracticable to do so.
(2) If the commission is unable to complete the investigation within 100 days, or when
the commission takes further action under subsection (c), within 100 days after the
commission assumes jurisdiction of a complaint, the commission shall inform the
parties in writing of the reasons for not doing so.
(3) The commission shall make final administrative disposition within one year after
the filing of the complaint or, when the commission takes further action under
subsection (c), within one year after the commission assumes jurisdiction of a
complaint, unless it is impracticable to do so.
(4) If the commission is unable to make final administrative disposition of the
complaint within one year of the date of filing, or when the commission takes further
action under subsection (c), within one year after the commission assumes jurisdiction
of a complaint, the commission shall inform the parties in writing of the reasons for not
doing so.
(f) (1) If it is determined that probable cause exists for crediting the allegations of the
complaint, the commission shall serve written notice of such determination on the
person aggrieved. The commission shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the
alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation
and persuasion which shall be held, insofar as possible, in the cities or other localities
where the alleged discriminatory housing practices have occurred or are about to occur.
The commission is hereby authorized to enter into formal conciliation agreement which
shall include the person aggrieved and the respondent as signatories. Such agreements
may include in the provisions thereof any term or condition which may be included in a
final order of the commission. Each conciliation agreement shall be made public unless
the person aggrieved and respondent otherwise agree and the commission determines
that disclosure is not required to further the purposes of this act.
(2) Any of the parties to a conciliation agreement may apply to the district court of the
county where the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred, or was about to
occur, for specific performance of any such agreement.
(g) If the commission is unable to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory
housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation and persuasion, a
hearing may be held before the commission in the manner provided in K.S.A. 44-1005,
and amendments thereto, for holding hearings under the Kansas act against
discrimination. In any such hearing, the burden of proof shall be on the complainant.
(h) In lieu of a hearing under subsection (g), a complainant, a respondent or an
aggrieved person on whose behalf the complaint was filed may elect to have the claims
asserted in the complaint decided in a civil action as provided in subsection (d) of K.S.A.
44-1021, and amendments thereto. The election must be made not later than 20 days
after the receipt by the electing person of service in the manner provided in K.S.A. 44-
1005, and amendments thereto, or, in the case of an election by the commission, not
later than 20 days after such service. The person making the election shall give notice to
the commission and to all other complainants and respondents to whom the complaint
relates. If a timely election is made under this subsection, the commission shall file, not
later than 30 days after the election is made, a civil action as provided in subsection (d)
of K.S.A. 44-1021, and amendments thereto.
(i) If an election is not made under subsection (h) and the commission finds that a
respondent has engaged in or is engaging in any discriminatory housing practice, the
commission shall render an order requiring the respondent to cease and desist from
such discriminatory housing practice, and such order may direct a respondent to take
such affirmative action as the commission deems necessary to effectuate the intent and
purposes of this act, including, but not limited to, the selling or renting of specified real
property and the lending of money for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation,
repair or maintenance of real property. Such order may also include an award of actual
damages, including damages caused by pain, suffering and humiliation. Such order may
also, to vindicate the public interest, assess a civil penalty against the respondent:
(1) In an amount not exceeding $10,000, if the respondent has not been adjudged to
have committed any prior discriminatory housing practice;
(2) subject to the provisions of subsection (i)(4), in an amount not exceeding $25,000, if
the respondent has been adjudged to have committed one other discriminatory housing
practice during the five-year period ending on the date of the filing of the complaint;
(3) subject to the provisions of subsection (i)(4), in an amount not exceeding $50,000, if
the respondent has been adjudged to have committed two or more discriminatory
housing practices during the seven-year period ending on the date of the filing of the
complaint; and
(4) if the acts constituting the discriminatory housing practice that is the object of the
complaint are committed by the same natural person who has been previously adjudged
to have committed acts constituting a discriminatory housing practice in the amounts
provided by subsections (i)(2) and (i)(3) without regard to the period of time within
which any subsequent discriminatory housing practice occurred.
Any such civil penalty shall be remitted to the state treasurer in accordance with the
provisions of K.S.A. 75-4215, and amendments thereto. Upon receipt of each such
remittance, the state treasurer shall deposit the entire amount in the state treasury to
the credit of the state general fund.
(j) Within 15 days after an order is served by the commission requiring or prohibiting
action by a respondent, the respondent shall notify the commission in writing of the
manner in which the respondent has complied with the order.
(k) In the case of an order with respect to a discriminatory housing practice that
occurred in the course of a business subject to a licensing or regulation by a state
agency, the commission shall, not later than 30 days after the respondent has complied
with the order, or, if such order is judicially reviewed under K.S.A. 44-1021, and
amendments thereto, 30 days after such order is in substance affirmed upon such
review:
(1) Send copies of the findings of fact, conclusions of law, and the order, to that state
agency; and
(2) recommend to the state agency appropriate disciplinary action, including, where
appropriate, the suspension or revocation of the license of the respondent.
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 5; L. 1972, ch. 194, § 10; L. 1984, ch. 186, § 2; L. 1988, ch. 356,
§ 151; L. 1991, ch. 147, § 11; L. 1992, ch. 142, § 3; L. 2001, ch. 5, § 146; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1020.   Same; subpoenas; witness fees and mileage; interim judicial relief; criminal enforcement of
subpoenas. (a) Upon written application to the commission, a respondent shall be entitled
to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the
commission to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued
by the commission. Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their
face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at
respondent's request.
(b) Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the commission shall be entitled to the same
witness and mileage fees as are allowed witnesses in proceedings in district courts. Fees
payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent
shall be paid by the respondent.
(c) If the commission concludes at any time following the filing of a complaint that
prompt judicial action is necessary to carry out the purposes of this act, the commission
may bring a civil action in the district court of the county in which the alleged
discriminatory housing practice is alleged to have occurred, for appropriate temporary
or preliminary relief pending final disposition of the complaint under this section. The
commission shall promptly notify the attorney general of the filing of any action
pursuant to this subsection. Any temporary restraining order or other order granting
preliminary or temporary relief shall be issued in accordance with the rules of civil
procedure. The commencement of a civil action under this subsection does not affect the
initiation or continuation of administrative proceedings under this act.
(d) Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to answer any
lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents or other evidence, if in such person's
power to do so in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order of the commission, shall,
upon conviction, be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than one
year, or both such fine and imprisonment. Any person who, with intent thereby to
mislead the commission, shall make or cause to be made any false entry or statement of
fact in any report, account, record or other document, submitted to the commission
pursuant to subpoena or other order of the commission, or who shall willfully neglect or
fail to make or cause to be made full, true and correct entries in such reports, accounts,
records or other documents, or who shall willfully mutilate, alter or by any other means
falsify any documentary evidence, shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $1,000
or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both such fine and imprisonment.
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 6; L. 1972, ch. 194, § 11; L. 1991, ch. 147, § 12; January 1,
1992.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1021.   Same; judicial review of commission action; civil enforcement of act. (a) Within 45 days
after the entry of an order by the commission pursuant to K.S.A. 44-1019 and
amendments thereto or within 30 days after the commission has received written
notification of the manner in which a respondent has complied with the commission's
order, the commission or a person aggrieved may bring a civil action in the district
court of the county in which the alleged discriminatory housing practice is alleged to
have occurred or in which the respondent resides or transacts business, but upon
application by the person aggrieved and the commission, the attorney general or the
appropriate district or county attorney may provide the attorney necessary to bring the
action authorized herein. Such action may be brought to enforce the order of the
commission, or to enforce any of the rights granted or protected by K.S.A. 44-1016, 44-
1017 and 44-1026, and amendments thereto, insofar as such rights relate to the subject
of the complaint with respect to which the order was issued. All such actions shall be
heard by the court in a trial de novo. Upon application of any party to such action, the
commission shall make available to all parties the records and information gathered
during any investigation or hearing conducted pursuant to the authority granted by this
act, except that any records or information concerning the commission's efforts to
eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory housing practice by informal methods of
conference, conciliation and persuasion shall not be admissible as evidence in such
action. If the respondent shall request a copy of the transcript of the hearing, the
respondent shall pay for the cost of its preparation.
(b) If the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred, or is about to
occur, the court may, in its discretion, grant as relief any permanent, temporary or
mandatory injunction, temporary restraining order or other proper order, but any sale,
encumbrance or rental consummated prior to the issuance of any court order issued
under the authority of this act, and involving a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer or
tenant without actual notice of the existence of the filing of a complaint or civil action
under the provisions of this act, shall not be affected.
(c) Whenever a complaint is filed, or a civil action commenced, under the provisions of
this act, the commission may post notice thereof on any real property which is the
subject of such complaint or action.
(d) (1) An aggrieved person may commence a civil action in a district court of the
county in which the alleged discriminatory housing practice is alleged to have occurred
or in which the respondent resides or transacts business not later than two years after
the occurrence or the termination of an alleged discriminatory housing practice,
whichever occurs last, to obtain appropriate relief with respect to such discriminatory
housing practice. Except in the case of an action arising from a breach of a conciliation
agreement, the computation of the two-year period shall not include any time during
which an administrative proceeding under this act was pending with respect to a
complaint under this act based on such discriminatory housing practice.
(2) If the United States department of housing and urban development, the commission
or a local agency has obtained a conciliation agreement with the consent of an
aggrieved person, no action may be filed under this subsection by such aggrieved
person with respect to the alleged discriminatory housing practice which forms the
basis for such complaint except for the purpose of enforcing the terms of such an
agreement.
(3) An aggrieved person may not commence a civil action under this subsection with
respect to an alleged discriminatory housing practice which forms the basis of a hearing
under K.S.A. 44-1019 and amendments thereto.
(4) In a civil action under this subsection, if the court finds that a discriminatory
housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may award to the plaintiff
actual and punitive damages and, subject to subsection (d)(5), may grant as relief, as the
court deems appropriate, any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary
restraining order or other order, including an order enjoining the defendant from
engaging in such practice or ordering such affirmative action as may be appropriate.
The court, in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party, other than the state of
Kansas, reasonable attorney fees and costs. The state of Kansas shall be liable for such
fees and costs to the same extent as a private person.
(5) Relief granted under this subsection shall not affect any contract, sale,
encumbrance or lease consummated before the granting of such relief and involving a
bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer or tenant, without actual notice of the filing of a
complaint with the commission or civil action under this act.
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 7; L. 1972, ch. 194, § 12; L. 1991, ch. 147, § 13; L. 1992, ch.
142, § 4; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1022.   Same; civil action by attorney general, when. Whenever the attorney general or any
district or county attorney, within the appropriate county, has reasonable cause to
believe that any person or group of persons is engaged in a pattern or practice of
resistance to the full enjoyment of any of the rights granted by this act, or that any group
of persons has been denied any of the rights granted by this act and such denial raises
an issue of general public importance, the attorney general or district or county
attorney may bring a civil action, within one year after the alleged discriminatory
housing practice occurred, in the district court where an action may be commenced
pursuant to K.S.A. 44-1021 and amendments thereto, requesting such preventive relief,
including an application for a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order or
other order against the person or persons responsible for such pattern or practice or
denial of rights, as the attorney general or district or county attorney deems necessary
to insure the full enjoyment of the rights granted by this act.
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 8; L. 1991, ch. 147, § 14; January 1, 1992.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1023.   Same; assignment of case; expedition. Any court in which a proceeding is instituted
under K.S.A. 44-1021 or 44-1022 shall assign the case for hearing at the earliest
practicable date and cause the case to be in every way expedited.
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 9; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1024.   Same; effect of city ordinances governing housing practices. Nothing in this act shall be
construed to invalidate or limit any ordinance of any city in this state that grants,
guarantees or protects the same rights as are granted by this act; but any ordinance of a
city that purports to require or permit any action that would be a discriminatory
housing practice under this act shall, to that extent, be invalid.
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 10; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1025.   Same; cooperation of commission with local agencies; agreements. The commission may
cooperate with local agencies charged with the administration of local fair housing
ordinances and, with the consent of such agencies, utilize the services of such agencies
and their employees and, notwithstanding any other provision of law, may reimburse
such agencies and their employees for services rendered to assist the commission in
carrying out this act. In furtherance of such cooperative efforts, the commission may
enter into written agreements with such local agencies. All such agreements and
terminations thereof shall be made available to the public by the commission.
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 11; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1026.   Same; unlawful acts; enforcement of section. It shall be unlawful to coerce,
intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on
account of such person's having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of such person's
having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right
granted or protected by K.S.A. 44-1016 or 44-1017, and amendments thereto.
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 12; L. 1991, ch. 147, § 15; January 1, 1992.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1027.   Same; unlawful act; penalties. (a) No person, whether or not acting under color of
law, shall by force or threat of force willfully injure, intimidate or interfere with, or
attempt to injure, intimidate or interfere with:
(1) Any person because of such person's race, religion, color, sex, disability, familial
status, national origin or ancestry and because such person is or has been selling,
purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or negotiating for the sale,
purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any real property, or applying for or
participating in any service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting real property;
(2) any person because such person is or has been, or in order to intimidate such
person or any other person or any class of persons from:
(A) Participating, without discrimination on account of race, religion, color, sex,
disability, familial status, national origin or ancestry, in any of the activities, services,
organizations or facilities described in subsection (a)(1); or
(B) affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection so to
participate; or
(3) any citizen because such citizen is or has been, or in order to discourage such
citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to
participate, without discrimination on account of race, religion, color, sex, disability,
familial status, national origin or ancestry, in any of the activities, services,
organizations or facilities described in subsection (a)(1), or participating lawfully in
speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to so participate.
(b) Violation of this section is punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both such fine and imprisonment, except
that:
(1) If bodily injury results, such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $10,000 or imprisonment for not more than 10 years, or both such fine and
imprisonment; and
(2) if death results, such violation shall be punishable by imprisonment for any term of
years or for life.
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 13; L. 1972, ch. 194, § 13; L. 1991, ch. 147, § 16; January 1,
1992.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1028.   Same; severability. If any provision of this act or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the act and the application of
the provision to other persons not similarly situated or to other circumstances shall not
be affected thereby.
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 14; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1029.   Same; act supplemental. This act shall be supplemental to and a part of the Kansas
act against discrimination.
History: L. 1970, ch. 193, § 15; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

44-1030.   State and local government contracts; mandatory provisions. (a) Except as provided by
subsection (c), every contract for or on behalf of the state or any county or municipality
or other political subdivision of the state, or any agency of or authority created by any of
the foregoing, for the construction, alteration or repair of any public building or public
