GH Real Estate approved legal-source text chunk — GH-KS-02_Kansas-Eviction-Fair-Housing-Screening-Safety-Addenda_CURRENT.part-001.txt — verified through 2026-07-12. Official source text controls.

in comparison to prices of competitors or one's own price at a past or future time;
(8) falsely stating, knowingly or with reason to know, that a consumer transaction
involves consumer rights, remedies or obligations;
(9) falsely stating, knowingly or with reason to know, that services, replacements or
repairs are needed;
(10) falsely stating, knowingly or with reason to know, the reasons for offering or
supplying property or services at sale or discount prices;
(11) sending or delivering a solicitation for goods or services which could reasonably
be interpreted or construed as a bill, invoice or statement of account due, unless:
(A) Such solicitation contains the following notice, on its face, in conspicuous and
legible type in contrast by typography, layout or color with other printing on its face:
"THIS IS A SOLICITATION FOR THE PURCHASE OF GOODS OR SERVICES AND NOT A
BILL, INVOICE OR STATEMENT OF ACCOUNT DUE. YOU ARE UNDER NO OBLIGATION
TO MAKE ANY PAYMENTS UNLESS YOU ACCEPT THIS OFFER"; and
(B) such solicitation, if made by any classified telephone directory service not affiliated
with a local telephone service in the area of service, contains the following notice, on its
face, in a prominent and conspicuous manner:
"_____________________________ IS NOT
 (name of telephone directory service)
AFFILIATED WITH ANY LOCAL TELEPHONE COMPANY";
(12) using, in any printed advertisement, an assumed or fictitious name for the
conduct of such person's business that includes the name of any municipality,
community or region or other description of the municipality, community or region in
this state in such a manner as to suggest that such person's business is located in such
municipality, community or region unless: (A) Such person's business is, in fact, located
in such municipality, community or region; or (B) such person includes in any such
printed advertisement the complete street and city address of the location from which
such person's business is actually conducted. If located outside of Kansas, the state in
which such person's business is located also shall be included. The provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to the use of any trademark or service mark registered under
the laws of this state or under federal law; any such name that, when applied to the
goods or services of such person's business, is merely descriptive of them; or any such
name that is merely a surname. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to impose
any liability on any publisher when such publisher had no knowledge the business was
not, in fact, located in such municipality, community or region;
(13) (A) making an oral solicitation for products or services based on a mortgage
trigger lead unless the solicitation clearly and conspicuously states in the initial phase of
the solicitation that the solicitor is not affiliated with the lender or broker with which
the consumer initially applied and that the solicitation is based on personal information
about the consumer that was purchased, directly or indirectly, from a consumer
reporting agency without the knowledge or permission of the lender or broker with
which the consumer initially applied;
(B) making a written solicitation for products or services based on a mortgage trigger
lead unless the solicitation clearly and conspicuously states on the first page of the
solicitation that the solicitor is not affiliated with the lender or broker with which the
consumer initially applied and that the solicitation is based on personal information
about the consumer that was purchased, directly or indirectly, from a consumer
reporting agency without the knowledge or permission of the lender or broker with
which the consumer initially applied. Clear and conspicuous shall include legible type in
contrast by typography, layout or color with other printing on the first page of the
correspondence; and
(C) any solicitor under clause (A) or (B) shall be in compliance with the provisions of
the Kansas mortgage business act, unless otherwise exempted from such act, and any
other law or regulation; and
(14) failing to release funds representing an insurance settlement payment for damage
to real property subject to a mortgage by the mortgage holder to the mortgagor within
30 days after receiving written proof that the damaged property is replaced or
otherwise repaired to the satisfaction of the mortgagor and the mortgage holder. Any
person who submits false information regarding the condition of the property shall be
liable in damages to the mortgage holder or the mortgage holder's assignee for the
amount of the funds together with interest thereon, attorney fees, and any additional
damages that the mortgage holder or the mortgage holder's assignee has incurred.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 4; L. 1976, ch. 236, § 3; L. 1991, ch. 159, § 2; L. 1993, ch. 177, §
1; L. 2000, ch. 167, § 1; L. 2009, ch. 67, § 2; L. 2010, ch. 103, § 3; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

50-627.   Unconscionable acts and practices. (a) No supplier shall engage in any
unconscionable act or practice in connection with a consumer transaction. An
unconscionable act or practice violates this act whether it occurs before, during or after
the transaction.
(b) The unconscionability of an act or practice is a question for the court. In
determining whether an act or practice is unconscionable, the court shall consider
circumstances of which the supplier knew or had reason to know, such as, but not
limited to the following that:
(1) The supplier took advantage of the inability of the consumer reasonably to protect
the consumer's interests because of the consumer's physical infirmity, ignorance,
illiteracy, inability to understand the language of an agreement or similar factor;
(2) when the consumer transaction was entered into, the price grossly exceeded the
price at which similar property or services were readily obtainable in similar
transactions by similar consumers;
(3) the consumer was unable to receive a material benefit from the subject of the
transaction;
(4) when the consumer transaction was entered into, there was no reasonable
probability of payment of the obligation in full by the consumer;
(5) the transaction the supplier induced the consumer to enter into was excessively
onesided in favor of the supplier;
(6) the supplier made a misleading statement of opinion on which the consumer was
likely to rely to the consumer's detriment; and
(7) except as provided by K.S.A. 50-639, and amendments thereto, the supplier
excluded, modified or otherwise attempted to limit either the implied warranties of
merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose or any remedy provided by law for
a breach of those warranties.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 5; L. 1976, ch. 236, § 4; L. 1983, ch. 180, § 1; L. 1991, ch. 159, §
3; L. 1998, ch. 99, § 1; April 16.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

50-628.   Duties of the attorney general. (a) The attorney general shall:
(1) Enforce this act throughout the state;
(2) cooperate with state and local officials, officials of other states and officials of the
federal government in the administration of comparable statutes;
(3) mail information concerning final judgments to persons who request it, for which
the attorney general may charge a reasonable fee to cover the expense;
(4) receive and act on complaints;
(5) maintain a public file of:
(A) Final judgments rendered under this act that have been either reported officially
or made available for public dissemination under subsection (a)(3) of K.S.A. 50-630 and
amendments thereto; and
(B) consent judgments; and
(6) report annually on or before January 1 to the governor and legislature on the
operations of the attorney general's office and on the acts or practices occurring in this
state that violate this act.
(b) The attorney general's report shall include a statement of the investigatory and
enforcement procedures and policies of the attorney general's office, of the number of
investigations and enforcement proceedings instituted and of their disposition, and of
the other activities of the office and of other persons to carry out the purposes of this
act.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 6; L. 1991, ch. 159, § 4; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-629.   General powers of the attorney general. The attorney general may conduct research,
hold public hearings, make inquiries and publish studies relating to consumer sales acts
or practices.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 7; January 1, 1974.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

50-630.   Rule-making requirements. (a) The attorney general may:
(1) Adopt as a rule a description of the organization of his or her office stating the
general course and method of operation of the office and methods whereby the public
may obtain information or make submissions or requests;
(2) adopt rules of practice setting forth the nature and requirements of all formal and
informal procedures available, including a description of the forms and instructions
used by the attorney general or his or her office; and
(3) make available for public inspection all rules, written statements of policy, and
interpretations formulated, adopted or used by the attorney general in discharging
functions.
(b) Rules and regulations adopted by the attorney general pursuant to this section shall
be governed by the provisions of article 4 of chapter 77 of the Kansas Statutes
Annotated.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 8; January 1, 1974.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

50-631.   Investigation of violations; remedies. (a) If, by the attorney general's own inquiries or
as a result of complaints, the attorney general has reason to believe that a supplier has
engaged in, is engaging in or is about to engage in an act or practice that violates this act,
the attorney general, or any deputy attorney general or assistant attorney general, may
administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses or matter and collect evidence.
(b) If matter that the attorney general subpoenas is located outside this state, the
person subpoenaed may either make it available to the attorney general at a convenient
location within the state or pay the reasonable and necessary expenses for the attorney
general or the attorney general's representative to examine the matter at the place
where it is located. The attorney general may designate representatives, including
officials of the state in which the matter is located, to inspect the matter on the attorney
general's behalf, and the attorney general may respond to similar requests from officials
of other states.
(c) Service by the attorney general of any notice requiring a person to file a statement
or report, or of a subpoena upon any person, shall be made by:
(1) the mailing thereof by certified mail to the last known place of business, residence
or abode within or without this state; or
(2) in the manner provided in the code of civil procedure as if a petition had been filed.
(d) The attorney general may request that an individual who refuses to comply with a
subpoena, on the ground that testimony or matter may incriminate the individual, be
ordered by the court to provide the testimony or matter. Except in a prosecution for
perjury, an individual who complies with a court order to provide testimony or matter
after asserting a privilege against self-incrimination to which the individual is entitled
by law, may not be subjected to a criminal proceeding or to a civil penalty to the
transaction concerning which the individual is required to testify or produce relevant
matter.
(e) If any person willfully fails or refuses to file any statement or report required by
this act, or obey any subpoena issued by the attorney general, the attorney general may,
after notice, apply to the district court and, after a hearing thereon, the district court
may issue an order:
(1) Granting injunctive relief restraining the sale or advertisement of any merchandise
by such persons; or
(2) vacating, annulling or suspending the corporate charter of a corporation created by
or under the laws of this state or revoking or suspending the certificate of authority to
do business in this state of a foreign corporation or revoking or suspending any other
licenses, permits or certificates issued pursuant to law to the supplier which are used to
further the allegedly unlawful practice; or
(3) granting such other relief as may be required, until the person files the statement
or report, or obeys the subpoena.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 9; L. 1989, ch. 159, § 2; L. 1991, ch. 159, § 5; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

50-632.   Remedies of the attorney general or any county or district attorney; procedure for
sequestration. (a) The attorney general or any county or district attorney may bring an
action:
(1) To obtain a declaratory judgment that an act or practice violates this act;
(2) to enjoin, or to obtain a restraining order against a supplier who has violated, is
violating, or is otherwise likely to violate this act; or
(3) to recover damages on behalf of consumers by reason of violations of this act; and
(4) to recover reasonable expenses and investigation fees.
(b) In lieu of instigating or continuing an action or proceeding, the attorney general
may accept a consent judgment with respect to any act or practice declared to be a
violation of this act. Such a consent judgment shall provide for the discontinuance by
the supplier entering the same of any act or practice declared to be a violation of this
act, and it may include a stipulation for the payment by such supplier of reasonable
expenses and investigation fees incurred by the attorney general. The consent judgment
also may include a stipulation for restitution to be made by such supplier to consumers
of money, property or other things received from such consumers in connection with a
violation of this act and also may include a stipulation for specific performance. Any
consent judgment entered into pursuant to this section shall not be deemed to admit the
violation, unless it does so by its terms. Before any consent judgment entered into
pursuant to this section shall be effective, it must be approved by the district court and
an entry made thereof in the manner required for making an entry of judgment. Once
such approval is received, any breach of the conditions of such consent judgment shall
be treated as a violation of a court order, and shall be subject to all the penalties
provided by law therefor.
(c) In any action brought by the attorney general or the county or district attorney, the
court may, without requiring bond of the attorney general or the county or district
attorney:
(1) Make such orders or judgments as may be necessary to prevent the use or
employment by a supplier of any practices declared to be a violation of this act;
(2) make such orders or judgments as may be necessary to compensate any consumer
for damages sustained;
(3) make such orders or judgments as may be necessary to carry out a transaction in
accordance with consumers' reasonable expectations;
(4) appoint a master or receiver or order sequestration of property whenever it shall
appear that the supplier threatens or is about to remove, conceal or dispose of property
to the damage of consumers to whom restoration would be made under this subsection
or whenever it shall appear that the property was derived or is commingled with other
property derived from transactions involving violations of the act, the court shall assess
the expenses of a master or receiver against the supplier;
(5) revoke any license or certificate authorizing that supplier to engage in business in
this state;
(6) issue a temporary restraining order or enjoin any supplier from engaging in
business in this state;
(7) award reasonable expenses and investigation fees, civil penalties and costs; and
(8) grant other appropriate relief.
(d) If an order of sequestration is issued pursuant to paragraph (4) of subsection (c):
(1) Application for such order shall be by motion verified by an affidavit setting forth
facts in support thereof and the court may hear such motion ex parte;
(2) such order shall operate as a lien on the sequestered property and may contain
other provisions as the court deems appropriate;
(3) if such order of sequestration was issued ex parte, such order shall be served upon
the supplier whose property is sequestered not later than five days after such order is
issued. Service shall be by any manner permitted by the code of civil procedure or by
ordinary first class mail to the last known address of the supplier;
(4) a supplier whose property is sequestered may file a motion to dissolve the
sequestration, verified by affidavit, putting in issue the sufficiency of the proceedings,
the supplier's claim of exemption as to any property which has been sequestered, or the
truth of the facts alleged in the affidavit on which the sequestration was ordered. The
court shall hold a hearing on the motion within five days after the filing; and
(5) upon a finding that the party which obtained an ex parte order of sequestration
knew or should have known that grounds for sequestration did not exist, the court,
upon a motion to dissolve, may allow actual damages for the wrongful sequestration.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 10; L. 1991, ch. 159, § 6; L. 1993, ch. 177, § 2; L. 2001, ch. 187,
§ 1; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

50-633.   Coordination with other supervision. (a) If the attorney general receives a complaint
or other information relating to noncompliance with this act by a supplier who is
subject to other supervision in this state, the attorney general shall inform the official or
agency having that supervision. The attorney general may request information about
suppliers from the official or agency.
(b) The attorney general and any other official or agency in this state having
supervisory authority over a supplier shall consult and assist each other in maintaining
compliance with this act. Within the scope of their authority, they may jointly or
separately make investigations, prosecute suits and take other official action they
consider appropriate.
(c) The county attorney or district attorney may investigate, institute and commence
actions under this act in the same manner as provided for the attorney general. It shall
be the duty of the county attorney or district attorney to lend to the attorney general
such assistance as the attorney general may request in the investigation,
commencement and prosecution of actions in the district court of his or her county
pursuant to this act, or the county attorney or district attorney may institute and
prosecute actions hereunder in the same manner as provided for the attorney general.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 11; January 1, 1974.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

50-634.   Private remedies. (a) Whether a consumer seeks or is entitled to damages or
otherwise has an adequate remedy at law or in equity, a consumer aggrieved by an
alleged violation of this act may bring an action to:
(1) Obtain a declaratory judgment that an act or practice violates this act; or
(2) enjoin or obtain a restraining order against a supplier who has violated, is violating
or is likely to violate this act.
(b) A consumer who is aggrieved by a violation of this act may recover, but not in a
class action, damages or a civil penalty as provided in subsection (a) of K.S.A. 50-636 and
amendments thereto, whichever is greater.
(c) Whether a consumer seeks or is entitled to recover damages or has an adequate
remedy at law, a consumer may bring a class action for declaratory judgment, an
injunction and appropriate ancillary relief, except damages, against an act or practice
that violates this act.
(d) A consumer who suffers loss as a result of a violation of this act may bring a class
action for the damages caused by an act or practice:
(1) Violating any of the acts or practices specifically proscribed in K.S.A. 50-626, 50-627
and 50-640, and amendments thereto, or
(2) declared to violate K.S.A. 50-626 or 50-627, and amendments thereto, by a final
judgment of any district court or the supreme court of this state that was either officially
reported or made available for public dissemination under subsection (a)(3) of K.S.A. 50-
630 and amendments thereto by the attorney general 10 days before the consumer
transactions on which the action is based, or
(3) with respect to a supplier who agreed to it, was prohibited specifically by the terms
of a consent judgment which became final before the consumer transactions on which
the action is based.
(e) Except for services performed by the office of the attorney general or the office of a
county or district attorney, the court may award to the prevailing party reasonable
attorney fees, including those on appeal, limited to the work reasonably performed if:
(1) The consumer complaining of the act or practice that violates this act has brought
or maintained an action the consumer knew to be groundless and the prevailing party is
the supplier; or a supplier has committed an act or practice that violates this act and the
prevailing party is the consumer; and
(2) an action under this section has been terminated by a judgment, or settled.
(f) Except for consent judgments, a final judgment in favor of the attorney general
under K.S.A. 50-632 and amendments thereto is admissible as prima facie evidence of
the facts on which it is based in later proceedings under this section against the same
supplier or a supplier in privity.
(g) Notice of an action commenced pursuant to subsection (b) or (c), or an appeal of
such action, shall be given to the attorney general, but failure to do so shall not provide
a defendant a defense in such action.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 12; L. 1974, ch. 230, § 3; L. 1976, ch. 236, § 5; L. 1978, ch. 210,
§ 1; L. 1991, ch. 159, § 7; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-635.   Application of act. (a) The Kansas consumer protection act does not apply to a
publisher, broadcaster, printer or other person engaged in the dissemination of
information or the reproduction of printed or pictorial matter so far as the information
or matter has been disseminated or reproduced on behalf of others without actual
knowledge that it violated the Kansas consumer protection act.
(b) The Kansas consumer protection act does not allow for a private cause of action or
remedy against a licensed health care provider for causes of action for personal injury
or death resulting, or alleged to have resulted, from medical negligence. For purposes of
this subsection, "health care provider" shall have the same meaning as provided in
subsection (a)(1) of K.S.A. 65-4915, and amendments thereto.
(c) A supplier alleged to have violated this act has the burden of showing the
applicability of this section.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 13; L. 1988, ch. 193, § 1; L. 1991, ch. 159, § 8; L. 2007, ch. 194,
§ 1; May 24.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-636.   Civil penalties. (a) The commission of any act or practice declared to be a violation
of this act shall render the violator liable to the aggrieved consumer, or the state or a
county as provided in subsection (c), for the payment of a civil penalty, recoverable in
an individual action, including an action brought by the attorney general or county
attorney or district attorney, in a sum set by the court of not more than $10,000 for each
violation. An aggrieved consumer is not a required party in actions brought by the
attorney general or a county or district attorney pursuant to this section.
(b) Any supplier who willfully violates the terms of any court order issued pursuant to
this act shall forfeit and pay a civil penalty of not more than $20,000 per violation, in
addition to other penalties that may be imposed by the court, as the court shall deem
necessary and proper. For the purposes of this section, the district court issuing an order
shall retain jurisdiction, and in such cases, the attorney general, acting in the name of
the state, or the appropriate county attorney or district attorney may petition for
recovery of civil penalties.
(c) In administering and pursuing actions under this act, the attorney general and the
county attorney or district attorney are authorized to sue for and collect reasonable
expenses and investigation fees as determined by the court. Civil penalties or contempt
penalties sued for and recovered by the attorney general shall be paid into the general
fund of the state. Civil penalties and contempt penalties sued for and recovered by the
county attorney or district attorney shall be paid into the general fund of the county
where the proceedings were instigated.
(d) Any act or practice declared to be a violation of this act not identified to be in
connection with a specific identifiable consumer transaction but which is continuing in
nature shall be deemed a separate violation each day such act or practice exists.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 14; L. 1974, ch. 230, § 4; L. 1976, ch. 236, § 6; L. 1978, ch. 210,
§ 2; L. 1991, ch. 159, § 9; L. 1993, ch. 177, § 3; L. 2001, ch. 105, § 2; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

50-637.   Powers of receiver; effect of receivership. (a) When a receiver is appointed by the
court pursuant to this act, the receiver shall have the power to sue for, collect, receive
and take into the receiver's possession all the property and chattels, rights and credits,
moneys and effects, lands and tenements, books, records, documents, papers, choses in
action, bills, notes and property of every description, including property with which
such property has been commingled, if it cannot be identified in kind because of such
commingling, and to sell, convey and assign the same and hold and dispose of the
proceeds thereof under the direction of the court. Any person who has suffered
damages as a result of the use or employment of any practice declared to be a violation
of this act and submits proof to the satisfaction of the court that the person has in fact
been damaged, may participate in the distribution of the assets.
(b) Subject to an order of the court terminating the business affairs of any supplier
who is the subject of receivership proceedings held pursuant to this act, the provisions
of this act shall not bar any claim by a consumer against any person who has acquired
any money or property, real or personal, or anything of value by means of any practice
herein declared to be a violation of this act.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 15; L. 1976, ch. 236, § 7; L. 1991, ch. 159, § 10; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

50-638.   Jurisdiction and venue. (a) Jurisdiction. Any supplier, whether or not a resident or
citizen of this state, who in person or through an agent or an instrumentality, engages in
a consumer transaction in this state, thereby submits the supplier to the jurisdiction of
the courts of this state as to any cause of action arising from such consumer transaction.
(b) Venue. Every action pursuant to this act shall be brought in the district court of any
county in which there occurred an act or practice declared to be a violation of this act,
or in which the defendant resides or the defendant's principal place of business is
located. If the defendant is a nonresident and has no principal place of business within
this state, then the nonresident defendant can be sued either in the district court of
Shawnee county or in the district court of any county in which there occurred an act or
practice declared to be a violation of this act.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 16; L. 1993, ch. 177, § 4; July 1.
                                      2025 Kansas Statutes

50-639.   Disclaimer or limitation of warranties; liabilities; attorney fees, when; section inapplicable to
seed for planting, livestock for agricultural purposes or disposal of surplus property by a
governmental entity. (a) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, with respect to
property which is the subject of or is intended to become the subject of a consumer
transaction in this state, no supplier shall:
(1) Exclude, modify or otherwise attempt to limit the implied warranties of
merchantability as defined in K.S.A. 84-2-314, and amendments thereto, and fitness for a
particular purpose, as defined in K.S.A. 84-2-315, and amendments thereto; or
(2) exclude, modify or attempt to limit any remedy provided by law, including the
measure of damages available, for a breach of implied warranty of merchantability and
fitness for a particular purpose.
(b) Notwithstanding any provision of law, no action for breach of warranty with
respect to property subject to a consumer transaction shall fail because of a lack of
privity between the claimant and the party against whom the claim is made. An action
against any supplier for breach of warranty with respect to property subject to a
consumer transaction shall not, of itself, constitute a bar to the bringing of an action
against another person.
(c) A supplier may limit the supplier's implied warranty of merchantability and fitness
for a particular purpose with respect to a defect or defects in the property only if the
supplier establishes that the consumer had knowledge of the defect or defects, which
became the basis of the bargain between the parties. In neither case shall such
limitation apply to liability for personal injury or property damage.
(d) Nothing in this section shall be construed to expand the implied warranty of
merchantability as defined in K.S.A. 84-2-314, and amendments thereto, to involve
obligations in excess of those which are appropriate to the property.
(e) A disclaimer or limitation in violation of this section is void. If a consumer prevails
in an action based upon breach of warranty, and the supplier has violated this section,
the court may, in addition to any damages recovered, award reasonable attorney fees
and a civil penalty under K.S.A. 50-636, and amendments thereto, to be paid by the
supplier who gave the improper disclaimer.
(f) The making of a limited express warranty is not in itself a violation of this section.
(g) This section shall not apply to seed for planting.
(h) This section shall not apply to sales of livestock for agricultural purposes, other
than sales of livestock for immediate slaughter, except in cases where the supplier
knowingly sells livestock which is diseased.
(i) This section shall not apply to the disposal of surplus property by any governmental
entity if the governmental entity has given conspicuous written notice of the warranty
limitation, exclusion or disclaimer. In the case of surplus property which is a motor
vehicle, a notice of such limitation, exclusion or disclaimer shall be affixed to a side
window of the motor vehicle. Such notice shall comply with the buyers guide required
by 16 C.F.R. 455.2 and 16 C.F.R. 455.3 (as in effect on the effective date of this act).
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 17; L. 1974, ch. 230, § 5; L. 1976, ch. 236, § 8; L. 1981, ch. 215,
§ 1; L. 1988, ch. 193, § 2; L. 1991, ch. 159, § 11; L. 1998, ch. 99, § 2; April 16.
                                      2025 Kansas Statutes

50-640.   Door-to-door sales; cancellation; required disclosures; notice of cancellation; definition. (a)
Except as provided in subsection (c)(1)(C), in addition to any right otherwise to revoke, a
consumer has the right to cancel a door-to-door sale made within this state until
midnight of the third business day after the day on which the consumer signs an
agreement or offer to purchase which includes the disclosures required by this section.
(b) In connection with any door-to-door sale made within this state, it constitutes an
unfair and deceptive act or practice within the meaning of K.S.A. 50-626, and
amendments thereto, for any supplier to:
(1) Fail to furnish the consumer with a fully completed receipt or copy of any contract
pertaining to such sale at the time of its execution, which is in the same language,
Spanish for example, as that principally used in the oral sales presentation and which
shows the date of the transaction and contains the name and address of the supplier,
and in immediate proximity to the space reserved in the contract for the signature of the
consumer or on the front page of the receipt if a contract is not used and in boldface
type of a minimum size of 10 points, a statement in substantially the following form:
"YOU THE BUYER, MAY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION AT ANY TIME PRIOR TO
MIDNIGHT OF THE THIRD BUSINESS DAY AFTER THE DATE OF THIS TRANSACTION.
SEE THE ATTACHED NOTICE OF CANCELLATION FORM FOR AN EXPLANATION OF THIS
RIGHT." For purposes of the required notices under this section, the term "buyer" shall
have the same meaning as the term "consumer."
(2) Fail to furnish each consumer, at the time the consumer signs the door-to-door sales
contract or otherwise agrees to buy consumer property or services from the supplier, a
completed form in duplicate, captioned "NOTICE OF CANCELLATION," which shall be
attached to the contract or receipt and be easily detachable, and which shall contain in
10-point boldface type the following information and statements in the same language,
Spanish for example, as that used in the contract:
NOTICE OF CANCELLATION
(Enter date of transaction)
___________________________
YOU MAY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION, WITHOUT ANY PENALTY OR OBLIGATION,
WITHIN THREE BUSINESS DAYS FROM THE ABOVE DATE.
IF YOU CANCEL, ANY PROPERTY TRADED IN, ANY PAYMENTS MADE BY YOU UNDER
THE CONTRACT OR SALE, AND ANY NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT EXECUTED BY YOU
WILL BE RETURNED WITHIN 10 BUSINESS DAYS FOLLOWING RECEIPT BY THE SELLER
OF YOUR CANCELLATION NOTICE, AND ANY SECURITY INTEREST ARISING OUT OF THE
TRANSACTION WILL BE CANCELED.
IF YOU CANCEL, YOU MUST MAKE AVAILABLE TO THE SELLER AT YOUR RESIDENCE, IN
SUBSTANTIALLY AS GOOD CONDITION AS WHEN RECEIVED, ANY PROPERTY
DELIVERED TO YOU UNDER THIS CONTRACT OR SALE; OR YOU MAY, IF YOU WISH,
COMPLY WITH THE INSTRUCTIONS OF THE SELLER REGARDING THE RETURN
SHIPMENT OF THE PROPERTY AT THE SELLER'S EXPENSE AND RISK.
IF YOU DO MAKE THE PROPERTY AVAILABLE TO THE SELLER, AND IF THE SELLER
DOES NOT PICK SUCH PROPERTY UP WITHIN 20 DAYS OF THE DATE OF YOUR NOTICE
OF CANCELLATION, YOU MAY RETAIN OR DISPOSE OF THE PROPERTY WITHOUT ANY
FURTHER OBLIGATION. IF YOU FAIL TO MAKE THE PROPERTY AVAILABLE TO THE
SELLER, OR IF YOU AGREE TO RETURN THE PROPERTY TO THE SELLER AND FAIL TO
DO SO, THEN YOU REMAIN LIABLE FOR PERFORMANCE OF ALL OBLIGATIONS UNDER
THE CONTRACT.
TO CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION, MAIL OR DELIVER A SIGNED AND DATED COPY OF
THIS CANCELLATION NOTICE OR ANY OTHER WRITTEN NOTICE, OR SEND A
TELEGRAM,
TO
   (Name of Seller)
AT
   (Address of Seller's Place of Business)
NOT LATER THAN MIDNIGHT OF __________________.
   (Date)
I HEREBY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION.
  (Date) (Buyer's Signature)
(3) Fail, before furnishing copies of the "notice of cancellation" to the consumer, to
complete both copies by entering the name of the supplier, the address of the supplier's
place of business, the date of the transaction, and the date, not earlier than the third
business day following the date of the transaction, by which the consumer may give
notice of cancellation.
(4) Include in any door-to-door sale contract or receipt any confession of judgment or
any waiver of any of the rights to which the consumer is entitled under this section
including specifically such consumer's right to cancel the sale in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(5) Fail to inform each consumer orally, at the time such consumer signs the contract
or purchases the property or services, of such consumer's right to cancel.
(6) Misrepresent in any manner the consumer's right to cancel.
(7) Fail or refuse to honor any valid notice of cancellation by a consumer and within 10
business days after the receipt of such notice, to (i) refund all payments made under the
contract or sale; (ii) return any property traded in, in substantially as good condition as
when received by the supplier; (iii) cancel and return any negotiable instrument
executed by the consumer in connection with the contract or sale and take any action
necessary or appropriate to terminate promptly any security interest created in the
transaction.
(8) Negotiate, transfer, sell, or assign any note or other evidence of indebtedness to a
finance company or other third party prior to midnight of the fifth business day
following the day the contract was signed or the property or services were purchased.
(9) Fail, within 10 business days of receipt of the consumer's notice of cancellation, to
notify the consumer whether the supplier intends to repossess or to abandon any
shipped or delivered property.
(c) For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply:
(1) "Door-to-door sale" means a sale, lease or rental of consumer property or services
with a purchase price of $25 or more, whether under single or multiple consumer
transactions, in which the supplier or the supplier's representative personally solicits
the sale, including those in response to or following an invitation by the consumer, and
the consumer's agreement or offer to purchase is made at a place other than the place of
business of the supplier. The term "door-to-door sale" does not include a transaction:
(A) Made pursuant to prior negotiations in the course of a visit by the consumer to a
retail business establishment having a fixed permanent location where the property is
exhibited or the services are offered for sale on a continuing basis; or
(B) in which the consumer is accorded the right of rescission by the provisions of the
consumer credit protection act (15 USCS 1635) or regulations issued pursuant thereto; or
(C) in which the consumer has initiated the consumer transaction and the property or
services are needed to meet a bona fide immediate personal emergency of the
consumer, and the consumer furnishes the supplier with a separate dated and signed
personal statement in the consumer's handwriting describing the situation requiring
immediate remedy and expressly acknowledging and waiving the right to cancel the
sale within three business days; or
(D) conducted and consummated entirely by mail or telephone; and without any other
contact between the consumer and the supplier or its representative prior to delivery of
the property or performance of the services; or
(E) in which the consumer has initiated the transaction and specifically requested the
supplier to visit the consumer's home for the purpose of repairing or performing
maintenance upon the consumer's real or personal property. If in the course of such a
visit, the supplier sells the consumer the right to receive additional services or property
other than replacement parts necessarily used in performing the maintenance or in
making the repairs, the sale of the additional property or services would not fall within
this exclusion; or
(F) pertaining to the sale or rental of real property, to the sale of insurance or to the
sale of securities or commodities by a broker-dealer registered with the securities and
exchange commission; or
(G) that occurs on the state fairgrounds during the annual Kansas state fair between a
consumer and a vendor who has been authorized by the state fair management to do
business on the state fairgrounds.
(2) "Place of business" means the main or permanent branch office of a supplier.
(3) "Purchase price" means the total price paid or to be paid for the consumer property
or services, including all interest and service charges.
(4) "Business day" means any calendar day except Sunday, or any legal holiday as
defined by K.S.A. 60-206 and amendments thereto.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 18; L. 1974, ch. 230, § 6; L. 1976, ch. 236, § 9; L. 1991, ch. 159,
§ 12; L. 1998, ch. 156, § 1; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-642.   Citation of act. This act may be cited as the Kansas consumer protection act.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 20; January 1, 1974.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-643.   Severability. If any provision of this act or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or
applications of this act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this act are severable.
History: L. 1973, ch. 217, § 21; January 1, 1974.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-6,139b. Requirements for holders of personal information. (a) As used in this section:
(1) "Holder of personal information" or "holder" means a person who, in the ordinary
course of business, collects, maintains or possesses, or causes to be collected, maintained
or possessed, the personal information of any other person.
(2) "Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, estate, cooperative,
association, government, governmental subdivision or agency or other entity.
(3) "Personal information" means personal information as defined by K.S.A. 50-7a01(g),
and amendments thereto, and any other information which identifies an individual for
which an information security obligation is imposed by federal or state statute or
regulation.
(4) "Record" has the meaning provided by K.S.A. 84-1-201, and amendments thereto.
(b) A holder of personal information shall:
(1) Implement and maintain reasonable procedures and practices appropriate to the
nature of the information, and exercise reasonable care to protect the personal
information from unauthorized access, use, modification or disclosure. If federal or
state law or regulation governs the procedures and practices of the holder of personal
information for such protection of personal information, then compliance with such
federal or state law or regulation shall be deemed compliance with this paragraph and
failure to comply with such federal or state law or regulation shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this paragraph; and
(2) unless otherwise required by federal law or regulation, take reasonable steps to
destroy or arrange for the destruction of any records within such holder's custody or
control containing any person's personal information when such holder no longer
intends to maintain or possess such records. Such destruction shall be by shredding,
erasing or otherwise modifying the personal identifying information in the records to
make it unreadable or undecipherable through any means.
(c) A holder of personal information shall have an affirmative defense to a violation of
subsection (b)(2) if such holder proves by clear and convincing evidence that:
(1) The violation resulted from a failure of the method of destruction of records to
make personal information contained in such records unreadable or undecipherable
through any means, and such failure could not reasonably have been foreseen despite
the holder's exercise of reasonable care in selecting and employing a method of
destruction; or
(2) the holder of personal information had in effect at the time of the violation a bona
fide written or electronic records management policy, including practices and
procedures reasonably designed, maintained, and expected to prevent a violation of
subsection (b)(2), and that the records involved in the violation of subsection (b)(2) were
destroyed or disposed of in violation of such policy. No affirmative defense under this
paragraph shall be available unless such holder proves:
(A) The employees or other persons involved in the violation received training in the
holder's written or electronic records management policy;
(B) the violation resulted from a good faith error; and
(C) no reasonable likelihood exists that the violation may cause, enable or contribute to
identity theft or identity fraud as defined by K.S.A. 21-6107, and amendments thereto, or
to a violation of an information security obligation imposed by federal or state statute or
regulation.
(d) Each violation of this section shall be an unconscionable act or practice in violation
of K.S.A. 50-627, and amendments thereto. Each record that is not destroyed in
compliance with subsection (b)(2) shall constitute a separate unconscionable act within
the meaning of K.S.A. 50-627, and amendments thereto.
(e) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the exclusive authority
to bring an action for any violation of this section shall be with the attorney general.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to create or permit a private cause of action
for any violation of this section.
(f) Nothing in this section relieves a holder of personal information from any duty to
comply with other requirements of state and federal law regarding the protection of
such information.
(g) This section shall be part of and supplemental to the Kansas consumer protection
act.
History: L. 2016, ch. 103, § 2; July 1.
Ad Hoc Committee on Best Practices for Eviction Proceedings
                     Initial Report




                   Prepared under
    Supreme Court Administrative Order 2021-CM-154

            For Consideration on April 20, 2022
    Ad Hoc Committee on Best Practices in Eviction Proceedings

Hon. Sarah Warner, judge, Kansas Court of Appeals, chair
Hon. Courtney Mikesic, district court judge, 29th Judicial District
Hon. Christopher Velez, district magistrate judge, 25th Judicial District
Hon. Daniel Vokins, district magistrate judge, 10th Judicial District
Hon. Rodger Woods, district court judge, 18th Judicial District
Amber Ballard, trial court clerk IV, 7th Judicial District
Tracy Hays, trial court clerk V, 18th Judicial District
Jessica Albers, president, Apartment Association of Greater Wichita, Wichita
Erin Beckerman, attorney, Topeka
Michelle Ewert, associate professor, Washburn School of Law, Topeka
L. Donald Huelson, attorney, Olathe
Casey Johnson, attorney, Kansas City
Kerry Kinkade, attorney, Lenexa
Bobbie Lee Riling, attorney, Lawrence
Sue Rouse, member, Hays Housing Authority Board, Hays
Paul Shipp, attorney, Manhattan

    With significant and excellent support from Sarah Hoskinson,
    Director of Access to Justice, Office of Judicial Administration




                                   2
Executive Summary

        Eviction is rarely anyone's first choice, and with good reason. Housing
stability benefits the tenant by providing a steady home, and it benefits the
property owner by providing constant income and a consistent resident to
monitor the owner's investment. But when an eviction petition is filed, everyone
involved—property owners, tenants, and the courts—benefits from accurate,
understandable, and fair eviction procedures.

       This crucial need for housing stability was on full display during the COVID-
19 pandemic. Homes became multipurpose spaces, serving as workplaces,
schools, and dwellings. Thus, the risk posed by evictions from rental properties
became all the more dire. In an effort to help people remain in their rented
housing, the federal government provided billions of dollars in aid, to be
administered by states. In Kansas alone, over $300 million in emergency rental
assistance funds are available for this purpose. And both the Kansas and federal
governments prohibited evictions for unpaid rent.

       When the last eviction moratorium expired in October 2021, the Kansas
Supreme Court—motivated in part by news of national spikes in eviction filings—
established the Supreme Court Ad Hoc Committee on Best Practices in Eviction
Proceedings. Over the course of four months, the committee examined all
aspects of Kansas eviction procedures and courtroom practices.

     This report summarizes the committee's initial observations and
recommendations. The report is divided into three parts.

        Part 1 describes the Kansas eviction process and the number of evictions
filed in Kansas, as well as the effect of the pandemic on eviction filings.

       Part 2 discusses the challenges and barriers that cause parties to file
evictions instead of taking advantage of Kansas emergency rental assistance
funds or seeking other out-of-court solutions. It also identifies three
opportunities to address these challenges.

       Part 3 summarizes the committee's recommendations and proposed
timeline for addressing these challenges over the next 18 months.


                                         3
Committee's Charge and Methods

        On October 18, 2021, Chief Justice Marla Luckert signed Supreme Court
Administrative Order 2021-CM-154, which established the Ad Hoc Committee on
Best Practices in Eviction Proceedings. The committee was broadly charged with
studying all aspects of eviction proceedings, with the goal of "reducing court
filings, expeditiously resolving pending cases, and enhancing housing stability."
Order 2021-CM-154, at 1. To achieve this goal, appointed committee members
represented all the populations related to the eviction process:

    District judges and district magistrate judges who routinely handle eviction
     proceedings, as well as court clerks who shepherd those dockets.
    Attorneys from Kansas Legal Services and the Washburn Law Clinic, who
     routinely represent tenants involved in eviction proceedings.
    Property managers and attorneys who routinely represent property owners
     in eviction cases.
    Community and nonprofit groups that provide housing assistance.
    The Kansas Housing Resources Corporation, which reviews applications for
     and distributes the emergency rental assistance funds made available in
     response to the COVID-19 pandemic.

        The committee met most Tuesdays from late October through February. At
its first meeting, the committee discussed its charge as well as pressing evictions
issues, particularly with the recent end of the Center for Disease Control and
Prevention's moratorium on evictions. At the end of the first meeting, committee
members established four workgroups for the initial stages of its discussion,
aiming to provide recommendations in the following areas:

    Immediate needs brought to light by the pandemic.
    Data identification and collection relating to eviction filings throughout the
     state.
    Education and outreach efforts.
    Long-term, structural improvements (through adopting Supreme Court
     rules, amending statutes, or effecting other systemic change).


                                         4
       The committee's weekly meetings were structured to allow a general
discussion of any matters members had encountered relating to evictions,
followed by a series of breakout sessions to allow the workgroups to develop
their recommendations and time for the workgroups to discuss their progress
with the whole committee.

       In February, each workgroup submitted a written report to the committee's
chairperson, detailing specific recommendations the members believed the
Kansas Supreme Court should consider. These recommendations were collected
and shared with all committee members for their consideration and comment. In
late February, the committee met to discuss which recommendations they would
present to the court in this initial report. The committee also prioritized these
recommendations by placing them on a timeline.

      On the whole, the members of the committee were able to agree on most
recommendations in most areas. In fact, several committee members have
commented throughout the process how refreshing it was that, despite different
backgrounds and constituencies, the committee developed trust in one another
and achieved common ground.

      After all, everyone—property owners, tenants, the courts, and the
community at large—benefits from access to accurate educational resources,
alternatives to eviction when appropriate, and fair and consistent court
procedures.




                                        5
                                     Part 1:
               The Kansas Eviction Process—in Law and in Practice


      Before examining the current state of evictions in Kansas, it is helpful to
consider a summary of Kansas eviction laws. Residential evictions in Kansas are
primarily governed by three articles in the Kansas statutes:

    The Residential Landlord and Tenant Act (RLTA), found in Article 25 of
     Chapter 58, sets forth the substantive rights and responsibilities of
     property owners and tenants, including the circumstances when a property
     owner may evict a tenant from the housing unit.

    The procedures governing the physical eviction process—the action to
     remove the tenant from the housing unit and restore possession to the
     property owner—are included in Article 38 of Chapter 61.

    Any related claims for damages (such as actions for unpaid rent) are
     generally governed by the Code of Civil Procedure for Limited Actions,
     K.S.A. 61-2801 et seq., unless the relief sought requires a Chapter 60 action.

       As a starting point, the RLTA enumerates several legal duties of the
property owner and the tenant. See K.S.A. 58-2553 (responsibilities of the
property owner); K.S.A. 58-2555 (responsibilities of the tenant). For example, the
property owner must provide a housing unit that complies with all material
health and safety codes, must reasonably maintain any common areas, and must
make sure that the housing unit is generally safe with adequate electricity,
plumbing, sanitation, heat, ventilation, and water. See K.S.A. 58-2553(a). Similarly,
the tenant must keep the premises that he or she occupies clean and safe, use
the utilities reasonably, and carry on in such a way that neighbors and other
tenants can peacefully conduct their lives. See K.S.A. 58-2555.

        To enforce those duties, amend or cancel the rental agreement, or pursue
relief in court, the RTLA requires the aggrieved person to provide written notice
of the deficiency to the offending party, as well as some opportunity for the
responsible person to cure the problem. The timeframe for that notice and
curative period varies based on the type of dispute:


                                          6
    Tenant's 14-30 Day Notice to the Property Owner.
     If the property owner has failed to materially comply with the rental
     agreement or K.S.A. 58-2553, the tenant can serve a "14-30 Notice" on the
     property owner. This notice identifies any breach and informs the property
     owner that the rental agreement will terminate in 30 days. If the breach is
     remedied within 14 days of the notice, the rental agreement continues.
     K.S.A. 58-2559(a)(1). The tenant can also recover damages, including return
     of the security deposit, or obtain injunctive relief to address the
     noncompliance. K.S.A. 58-2559(b), (c).

    Tenant's 5-Day Notice to the Property Owner.
     If the property owner fails to deliver possession of the housing unit to the
     tenant on the date promised, the rental obligation abates until possession
     transfers. If the tenant provides a written notice to the property owner of
     noncompliance, the tenant may terminate the rental agreement after 5
     days and the property owner must return the security deposit. The tenant
     may also demand specific performance of the property owner and recover
     actual damages, with damages escalated for willful noncompliance or bad
     faith. See K.S.A. 58-2560.

    Property Owner's 14-30 Day Notice to the Tenant.
     If the tenant has failed to materially comply with the rental agreement or
     K.S.A. 58-2555, the property owner can serve a "14-30 Notice" on the
     tenant. This notice identifies any breach and informs the tenant that the
     rental agreement will terminate in 30 days if the deficiency is not cured. If
     the breach is remedied within 14 days of the notice, the rental agreement
     continues without further action. K.S.A. 58-2564(a).

    Property Owner's 3-Day Notice to Tenant for Nonpayment of Rent.
     If the tenant fails to pay rent when the rent is due, the property owner can
     provide a written notice of his or her intention to terminate the rental
     agreement in 3 days if the rent is not paid during that time. K.S.A. 58-
     2564(b).

       As this report discusses in more detail later in this section, most residential
evictions that are filed in Kansas are precipitated by this last circumstance—the


                                          7
tenant's failure to pay the rent. K.S.A. 58-2568 permits property owners to file a
petition for possession of the property, for rent, or for both, as well as a claim for
damage to the property. As with any other case, the defendant tenant may file
any counterclaims against the plaintiff property owner; the failure to timely raise
any counterclaims constitutes a waiver of those claims. See K.S.A. 58-2561.

       Petitions in eviction cases often include at least two categories of claims:
claims for possession of the property (and removal of the tenant, previously
called forcible detainer actions) and claims for unpaid rent and damages
(generally breach-of-contract claims and other related requests). Different
procedures govern each of these two categories.

Claims for Possession—the Eviction Itself

        The procedures covering the eviction of the tenant from the property—and
restoration of possession to the property owner—are found in K.S.A. 61-3801 et
seq. Before a property owner may evict a tenant, the owner must provide notice
of the intention to evict, served at least 3 days before any eviction petition is
filed. (The 3 days are 3 natural days, including weekends and holidays.) As a
practical matter, these notices are often combined with the Property Owner's 3-
Day Notice described in the previous section. See K.S.A. 61-3803. But they are
distinct requirements, and each must be satisfied.

       Once this notice has been given and the three days have passed, the
property owner may file the eviction petition. The petition must "describe the
premises for which possession is sought and why the plaintiff is seeking
possession." K.S.A. 61-3804. The statute does not require any other specific
information (such as the rental agreement or the 3-Day Notice) to be included or
attached. But the statute does clarify that the property owner may include in the
petition a request for any rent due, or the owner "may bring a subsequent lawsuit
for that amount." K.S.A. 61-3804.

      Note: Though Kansas law generally requires plaintiffs to bring all
      their claims arising out of one transaction in one suit, K.S.A. 61-3802
      specifically contemplates multiple cases being filed. That statute
      indicates that "[a] judgment in a lawsuit brought under K.S.A. 61-
      3801 through 61-3808 . . . shall not be a bar to any subsequent


                                          8
     lawsuit brought by either party for claims not included in such
     judgment." K.S.A. 61-3802. The committee discussed this section at
     some length. Some members did not feel it was fair to allow
     property owners to file claims for damages months or years after a
     tenant was removed from the property. Other members countered
     that the extent of a property owner's damages may not be known
     for some time and noted that Kansas statutes allow claims for breach
     of written leases to be brought within 5 years.

     Once a property owner has filed an eviction petition, Kansas statutes
contemplate an accelerated process to determine whether the tenant should be
removed from the property.

   Once a petition is filed, a summons issues to the tenant, including the date
    at which the tenant must appear or file an answer. K.S.A. 61-3805 allows
    the district court some discretion in setting this date, but the statute states
    this deadline must be between 3 and 14 days after the issuance of the
    summons.

   Kansas law also allows a district court flexibility to determine how best to
    handle the answer date. K.S.A. 61-3806 requires a tenant to "appear in
    person or by counsel at the time and date set forth in the summons" or to
    by file a written answer by that same date.

     Note: The way this is carried out in practice differs from district to
     district, largely based on historical practice or the preference of the
     judge hearing the eviction docket. Some judicial districts, like
     Johnson County, require attorneys representing property owners to
     be present at the "answer docket" so they can meet with any tenants
     who appear. Other districts, like Douglas County, do not require an
     attorney to appear but rather note whether the tenants appear at the
     docket or otherwise file an answer.

   If the tenant appears and disputes the allegations in the petition relating to
    possess, K.S.A. 61-3807(a) requires that a "trial shall be conducted within 14
    days after the appearance date stated in the summons." K.S.A. 61-3807(b)
    states the tenant may not be granted a continuance unless the tenant files

                                        9
      a bond that is both "approved by the court" and "conditioned for the
      payment of all damages and rent that may accrue is judgment is entered"
      against the tenant.

    If judgment is entered against the tenant for the possession of the
     property, the court issues a writ of restitution to remove the tenant. The
     writ "shall be executed within 14 days after the person named in the writ
     receives it." K.S.A. 61-3808(b).

       As this timeline demonstrates, the entire eviction process from filing to
transfer of possession—excluding any agreed-upon continuances—is designed
to take no more than 6 weeks. Under current practice, the members of our
committee agreed that property owners can waive this accelerated schedule by
agreeing to a continuance of the eviction trial or otherwise agreeing to a stay of
the proceedings while the parties pursue settlement options. Under K.S.A. 61-
3807, the statutory deadlines cannot be stayed or otherwise continued solely on
the tenant's request.

Eviction Filings in Kansas—Before and After the CDC Eviction Moratorium

      As this report previously indicated, a combination of state and federal
orders suspended residential evictions based on the nonpayment of rent In
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Kansas Supreme Court issued its
Administrative Orders suspending non-essential hearings in light of the COVID-
19 pandemic in March 2020. Shortly thereafter, Governor Laura Kelly and the CDC
ordered moratoria on residential evictions due to the nonpayment of rent.

      The CDC's moratorium only applied to residential evictions for
nonpayment of rent, not to residential evictions for other reasons, such as an
expired lease term or violations of other lease terms. Congress codified the CDC's
moratorium through legislation through January 31, 2021, but the governor's
order and the CDC's moratorium lasted significantly longer—through May 28,
2021, and October 3, 2021.

       From the outset, the committee understood that before it could make
meaningful recommendations regarding best practices for evictions in the wake
of the pandemic, it needed a baseline for comparison. The committee thus


                                        10
reviewed and compared data from pre-pandemic eviction filings (Fiscal Years
2017, 2018, and 2019) with filings during the pandemic (Fiscal Year 2021) and
new cases after October 3, 2021.

      Note: The committee also gathered information relating to filings in
      Fiscal Year 2020. This information, however, was less helpful, as it
      included three quarters before and one quarter during the
      pandemic. Given the mixed nature of those 12 months, this report
      largely disregards the data collected for FY2020.

       As this court is aware, Kansas judicial districts currently use three different
case management systems—Full Court, Odyssey, and Justice Information
Management System (JIMS). The Judicial Branch is in the process of converting all
courts to the Odyssey system. The committee requested information from all
three programs, but for obvious reasons all collected data came from Full Court
and JIMS. The committee was able to obtain the statistics for the number of total
limited action cases filed compared to the number of eviction cases filed, and to
review the disposition of those eviction cases. In general, the case management
systems were consistent in their treatment of default judgments and dismissals,
but not for other dispositions. In other words, the systems did not uniformly
capture information regarding whether a case was settled or tried.

       Turning to the data collected, an average of 108,915 limited-action cases
were filed each year for Fiscal Years 2017, 2018, and 2019. During the pandemic
Fiscal Year 2021, there were 79,530 new limited actions, a 27% decline in filings.

       Similarly, before the pandemic, there was an average of 14,560 eviction
cases per year filed annually. During Fiscal Year 2021, there were 9,110 new
eviction cases filed, or 5,450 fewer cases—a 37% decline.

                 Statewide limited actions filed, FY2017 – FY2021
                              FY2017                99,248
                              FY2018               114,457
                              FY2019               113,041
                              FY2020                90,863
                              FY2021                79,530



                                         11
                 Statewide eviction cases filed, FY2017 – FY2021
                             FY2017                14,455
                             FY2018                14,555
                             FY2019                14,671
                             FY2020                12,347
                             FY2021                 9,110

        This is not surprising, given the combination of the eviction moratorium
and the reduced filings overall during that period. Though none of the case
management systems presently captures information relating to the reason for
filing an eviction petition, the committee agreed that most residential evictions—
approximately 90%—are filed when the tenant fails to pay his or her rent.

      Since CDC’s moratorium expired on October 3, 2021, eviction filings have
returned to pre-pandemic levels in most parts of the state. Before the pandemic,
there were on average 280 new eviction cases filed each week. During Fiscal Year
2021, this weekly average dropped to about 175 new cases. And though there
was an initial spike in filings immediately after the moratorium expired, the
weekly filings leveled out over the next six weeks—averaging 277 cases per week.

                    Statewide eviction petitions filed by week
                         October 4, 2021             219
                         October 11, 2021            401
                         October 18, 2021            353
                         October 25, 2021            227
                        November 1, 2021             224
                        November 8, 2021             240

       The committee also examined eviction dispositions within the same period.
In the committee's experience, roughly half of eviction petitions result in a default
judgment, as the tenants do not appear at the answer docket and do not file a
written answer. The collected data is consistent with this anecdotal experience.
Before the pandemic, there were about 14,560 eviction cases filed each year in
Kansas and 7,303 default judgments. Another 25% of eviction petitions (an
average of 3,568 cases per year) were dismissed due to some procedural default
by the property owner—usually failure to provide the correct notice to the
tenant. Thus, about 75% of eviction petitions are not decided on the merits.

                                         12
                Statewide eviction dispositions, FY2017 – FY2021
                           FY2017       FY2018      FY2019 FY2020            FY2021
 Default Judgment            7,242        7,395      7,273    5,600           3,872
 Dismissed                   3,567        3,707      3,430    2,881           2,300
 Contested/Settled           2,651        2,512      2,477    1,907           1,179
 Trial                        150          150        97       144             191
 Other                        843          782       1,316    1,120            498

       Most of the remaining 25% of the cases are resolved through settlement;
very few cases are tried. It is not clear how trials are reported in the different case
management systems. But in the committee’s experience, less than 10% of
eviction cases are set on a trial docket (meaning, are scheduled for trial). Most of
those cases result in either a default judgment (if the tenant does appear) or
dismissal (if the property owner is absent). In many other cases, the parties reach
a settlement. The committee members estimate that only about 1% of new
eviction cases go to trial.

       By contrast, during Fiscal Year 2021, there were 9,110 eviction petitions
filed and 3,872 default judgments—or 43%—entered, a 7% decrease from pre-
pandemic levels. The same percentage of cases (25%) resulted in dismissal. And
about 2% of the cases were tried. Though it is impossible to know for certain, the
committee believes that the decrease in default judgments and increase in trials
during the pandemic was due to the eviction moratorium and the availability of
the rental assistance funds (the KERA Program discussed in more detail in Part 2).
During the pandemic, many eviction cases were being continued to allow
property owners and tenants to work together to obtain the rental assistance
funds. If the parties' efforts were successful, those cases would be dismissed.

       The committee also compared the eviction filings between urban and rural
judicial districts to see whether these trends were consistent across the state. The
committee thus compared filings in the 7th Judicial District (Douglas County), the
10th Judicial District (Johnson County), the 18th Judicial District (Sedgwick
County), and the 25th Judicial District (Finney, Greeley, Hamilton, Kearny, Scott,
and Wichita Counties). A few interesting trends in this data are worthy of note.




                                          13
              Pre-pandemic eviction cases and dispositions
                           Pre-Pandemic Average (Fiscal Years 2017-
                                              2019)
                         District 7 District 10 District 18 District 25
Eviction Petitions Filed   636         2320         5016        80
  % Kansas Evictions        4%         16%          34%        .5%
  Default Judgment         287         1029         2688        42
       Dismissed           218          393         1311        10
  Contested/Settled        122          671          995        25
          Trial              0          211           14         1
         Other               5          15            5          2

                Pandemic eviction cases and dispositions
                                         Fiscal Year 2021
                         District 7 District 10 District 18 District 25
Eviction Petitions Filed
  Default Judgment          162         346          1786       38
       Dismissed            111         101          1212       14
  Contested/Settled         88          281           500       29
          Trial              0          185           117        0
         Other               1           4             7         0

 New eviction petitions filed each week after end of CDC moratorium
   Week starting          District 7 District 10 District 18 District 25
  October 4, 2021            14          27         108           1
  October 11, 2021           25          53         168           0
  October 18, 2021            9          50         131           1
  October 25, 2021            5          46         108           0
 November 1, 2021             7          30         117           0
 November 8, 2021            11          26          97           0




                                  14
10th Judicial District (Johnson County)
            The 10th Judicial District has a population of 609,863. Before the
      pandemic, Johnson County had an average of 2,320 eviction petitions filed
      each year—16% of all Kansas eviction cases. During Fiscal Year 2021, there
      were 937 new eviction cases—1,383 fewer cases, a 60% decline. This 60%
      decline in eviction filings far exceeded the 37% State average decline
      during the pandemic.
           After the CDC moratorium expired, Johnson County eviction filings
      generally returned to pre-pandemic levels.
             Before the pandemic, roughly 44% of Johnson County eviction
      petitions resulted in a default judgment, a little less than the statewide
      average of 50%. About 17% of cases were dismissed, under the statewide
      average of 25%. Thus, 61% of Johnson County cases—compared with 75%
      of cases statewide—resulted in default judgments or dismissals.

18th Judicial District (Sedgwick County)
            The 18th Judicial District has a population of 523,824. Before the
      pandemic, Sedgwick County averaged 5,016 eviction filings annually, or
      34% of the total eviction cases filed in Kansas—more than twice as many as
      were filed in Johnson County. During Fiscal Year 2021, there was a 27%
      decline in new eviction petitions. This 27% decline was less than the 37%
      State average and far less the 60% decline in Johnson County.
             Unlike other areas of the state, eviction filings in Sedgwick County
      significantly increased after the CDC’s moratorium expired on October 3,
      2021. Before the pandemic, there were 96 new eviction cases filed every
      week in Sedgwick County. During the pandemic, that number dropped to
      70. But after the moratorium expired, Sedgwick County averaged 121 cases
      each week—about a 25% increase over pre-pandemic eviction filings.
            In Sedgwick County, about 54% of eviction petitions result in a
      default judgment, slightly higher than the State average of 50%. About
      26% of eviction petitions are dismissed. So about 80% of evictions—
      compared to the statewide average of 75%—are resolved through some
      procedural default. And far fewer cases—less than 0.2% evictions filed—go




                                           15
      to trial. (During the pandemic, the number of trials increased dramatically,
      with 3% of Sedgwick County evictions being resolved through a trial.)

7th Judicial District (Douglas County)
             The 7th Judicial District has a population of 118,785. Douglas County
      hears about 4% of Kansas eviction cases. During the pandemic, 35% fewer
      evictions were filed than in previous years—fairly consistent with the
      statewide decrease of 37%. After the CDC moratorium expired, Douglas
      County filings returned pre-pandemic levels.
             In Douglas County, 45% of eviction petitions result in default
      judgments, slightly less than the statewide average of 50%. About 34% of
      eviction petitions are dismissed, significantly higher than the 25% average
      across the state. This means that 79% of petitions result in a default
      judgment or a dismissal—close to the 75% statewide average. Very few
      cases are reported as going to trial.

25th Judicial District (Finney, Greeley, Hamilton, Kearny, Scott, and Wichita
Counties)
             The 25th Judicial District has a total population of 53,558. This
      district hears about .5% of Kansas eviction cases. Interestingly, the 25th
      Judicial District saw no change in the annual number of eviction petitions
      filed before, during, or after the pandemic.
             About 52.5% of eviction petitions in the 25th Judicial District result in
      a default judgment, while about 12.5% are dismissed—meaning about 65%
      are resolved on procedural defaults rather than on the merits. Almost no
      cases are tried.


    With this background, the report now turns to the challenges and
immediate opportunities for the committee identified within the eviction process.




                                         16
                                    Part 2:
        Challenges and Opportunities for Resolving Evictions out of Court


      As the previous discussion indicated, about 75% of eviction petitions are
resolved based on some procedural default by the tenant or property owner.
Most notably, in about 50% of cases, the tenant does not appear at the answer
docket or otherwise file an answer.

       Practically speaking, several considerations might inform a tenant's
decision not to contest the eviction. A tenant may decide that he or she is ready
to leave the premises (for financial reasons or some other reason). A tenant may
know he or she is unable to pay rent (though the tenant may or may not qualify
for rental assistance). Or a tenant may feel overwhelmed by the situation or may
not understand that he or she can contest the eviction.

       In some cases, such as in the first example listed, a tenant's default is the
result of a conscious decision. In others, it may be due to confusion or a lack of
understanding. The same is true for the 25% of cases that result in dismissal;
some of those cases are dismissed because the property owners consciously
decide to no longer pursue the eviction, but others are rooted in ignorance of or
misunderstanding about the eviction notices and procedures.

       Regardless of the reason for the procedural default, Kansas eviction
dockets are currently able to shoulder the high caseloads and short statutory
timeframes because about 75% of the cases filed are never litigated beyond the
petition. The committee questions the wisdom and equity of this judicial model,
which relies, at least in part, on litigants' ignorance to stay afloat. Should litigants
instead have access to accurate information about the eviction process so
property owners and tenants can make informed decisions during an eviction?
And should the Judicial Branch develop alternative channels for resolving
evictions to allow courts to continue to function while parties are able to make
better informed decisions?

      The answer to these questions, in the committee's view, is yes. This section
focuses on three opportunities to effect these goals during the next 18 months.



                                           17
Opportunity 1—Kansas Emergency Rental Assistance Funds

      Two federal laws enacted in 2021—the Coronavirus Response and Relief
Supplemental Appropriations Act of 2021 and the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021—provided significant federal funding to help tenants who were behind on
rent due to the pandemic remain in their homes. These funds must be used to
cover costs incurred between March 3, 2021, and December 31, 2024. The funds
must be disbursed by December 31, 2026.

       Governor Kelly designated the Kansas Housing Resource Center as the
administrator of these emergency funds—called the Kansas Emergency Rental
Assistance (KERA) program—in our state. To date, more than $150 million has
been disbursed under the KERA program. Tenants and property owners must
jointly apply for KERA funding. To receive KERA funds, property owners must
agree they will not pursue evict the tenant for nonpayment of rent. Up to 18
months of rental assistance may be available.

      The Kansas Judicial Branch website includes general information about
KERA funds, including a link to a YouTube video and links to information sheets
published by the KHRC (one for property owners and one for tenants). But in the
committee's experience, there remains widespread misunderstanding about how
KERA works and confusion about what assistance may be available. For example,
committee members observed anecdotally that tenants often believe that KERA
funds are no longer available once an eviction petition is filed, but this is not true.
Or property owners and their counsel have expressed the belief that the KERA
application process is unwieldy and will not result in timely relief; in reality,
however, KERA applications are expedited in several circumstances, including
when an eviction petition is pending.

      Judges across the state have taken varying approaches to KERA funds.
Some judges will take the opportunity when an eviction case goes to trial to ask
the parties whether they have considered applying for KERA funds. The attorney
committee members found this approach to be helpful but agreed that the
information should come earlier in the process—especially since so few eviction
cases are tried. The committee members unanimously agreed that the sooner this
information can be provided in the process, the more effective it will be.



                                          18
      One judge member of the committee questioned whether it was
appropriate for a judge to provide KERA information or whether it crossed into
the realm of legal advice. In general, the other members of the committee
believed merely providing information about resources where tenants and
property owners alike might learn about the KERA funds and process—similar to
what already exists on the Judicial Branch website—was appropriate. This
information could have a significant impact on eviction filings while those funds
are available.

Opportunity 2—Kansas Eviction Forms and Other Educational Resources

       Evictions proceedings almost always involve at least one self-represented
litigant. Tenants who cannot afford rent also cannot afford an attorney, and they
still may not qualify for assistance from Kansas Legal Services and other
organizations. During the pandemic, it is has become increasingly common for
both the tenant and the property owner to appear without counsel. Given the
relative complexity of the eviction procedure, it is no wonder that so few
proceedings are resolved on their merits.

       Faced with this challenge—on top of the societal disruption caused by
evictions generally and the sheer number of eviction petitions filed—Kansas
courts would benefit significantly from educational resources explaining the
Kansas eviction process. The Kansas Judicial Branch is in a unique position to
provide those resources.

      The committee envisioned two types of resources the Judicial Branch could
develop: (1) resources educating property owners, tenants, and the public about
the eviction process and (2) accessible forms for each stage in the eviction
proceedings to assist parties and the courts navigate the proceedings in
accordance with Kansas law.

       As to the first category of information, the Kansas Judicial Branch website
maintains a page (https://www.kscourts.org/Public/Eviction-resources) entitled
"Eviction Resources." Currently, that website includes a link to a YouTube video
about KERA funds, two brochures about KERA, an eviction pamphlet published by
the Kansas Bar Association, and various lawyer-referral resources. The page also



                                        19
includes a link to the current eviction forms published by the Kansas Judicial
Council. It does not include any information describing the eviction process.

       In the committee's view, there is great potential here for growth—for
education and outreach. Courts across the country have taken varied approaches
to developing educational materials for evictions. After reviewing other
jurisdictions' resources, the committee agreed that the Baltimore City District
Court's informational video was particularly effective. This video, which can be
viewed at https://www.publicjustice.org/en/legal_help/housing/, provides
information for tenants and property owners relating to tenancies, rental
agreements, and the eviction process. A similar resource could be incredibly
effective in Kansas courts.

       The committee also suggests encouraging bar associations and other
interested groups to develop educational programs for high-school students to
explain the landlord-tenant relationship and the rental process before the
students sign their first lease.

      Turning to forms, the Kansas Judicial Council currently maintains the
following forms relating to eviction proceedings:

    Notice to Leave (different forms for In-Person and by Mail)
    Petition for Eviction
    Summons
    Answer to Petition for Eviction
    Journal Entry
    Writ of Restitution for Immediate Possession

       The Judicial Council, in coordination with the Kansas Supreme Court's
Access to Justice Committee, has conducted a plain-language revision of the
petition and answer within the last two years. And the Access to Justice
Committee is in the process of drafting two information sheets—one for property
owners and one for tenants—to explain the information requested in the petition
and answer.



                                        20
       These steps are important. But the committee overwhelmingly agrees that
a more substantive revision of all these documents, handled by people more
familiar with the eviction process, would be helpful. The same group of people
could also make recommendations regarding several other forms that would be
helpful throughout the proceedings.

Opportunity 3—Alternative Dispute Resolution

        From the outset of the committee's discussion, committee members
expressed an interest in exploring whether any of the Pre-Eviction Diversion
Initiatives—which seek to resolve evictions before a petition is file—that had
been adopted in other parts of the country would be compatible with Kansas
eviction practice. The committee recognized that alternative dispute resolution
could be particularly effective in eviction proceedings, especially given the
availability of KERA funds over the course of the next two years. As one
committee member who manages rental properties observed, it is in everyone's
best interest if a tenant continues to live in the property and a property owner
continues to be paid under the lease.

       At the same time, however, the Kansas statutes governing evictions provide
several limitations on extrajudicial resolution of these cases. One of these
limitations is rooted in the expedited nature of the eviction proceeding. Kansas
law requires that trials for the possession of property in eviction cases be held
within 14 days of the answer date. See K.S.A. 61-3807(a). The committee
members agreed that this timing provision could be waived by the property
owner, but likely not by the court. This means that any alternative dispute
resolution program must be voluntary.

       Another limitation is more practical. Kansas courts' first contact with an
eviction occurs when the eviction petition is filed, which starts the expedited
process. Pre-filing initiatives are thus unworkable.

      Moreover, though many alternative dispute resolution programs in eviction
cases across the country are phrased as "diversion" initiatives, the committee
members questioned whether the Kansas eviction process lent itself to a true
"diversion." Others suggested that a "diversion" program might lead to
procedural complications, such as what would occur if tenant later violated an


                                         21
eviction diversion agreement. And several committee members who routinely
represent property owners indicated that they believed a voluntary program that
focused on dispute resolution, rather than "diversion," would have more buy-in
from those litigants.

       The committee members thus focused on voluntary templates for
alternative eviction resolution through court-facilitated mediation, rather than
true diversion. After reviewing and discussing several courts' approaches, the
committee found that the program adopted by the Monroe County, Indiana,
court was promising and could be compatible with Kansas eviction law.

       The Monroe County program is a district-centered approach. A local
judicial district employs an evictions facilitator who performs several functions.
The facilitator is present at the answer docket to answer any questions property
owners and tenants may have about the eviction process and provide
information regarding the KERA application. The facilitator also is available to act
as a mediator, should the litigants agree to attempt to resolve the case outside of
court.

       Inspired by this approach, the committee worked with the Office of Judicial
Administration to assist in applying for a grant through the National Center for
State Courts to establish a similar program in Sedgwick County. The committee
felt that Sedgwick County—which handles one-third of all Kansas evictions—
would provide the greatest opportunity for impact. The program and resources
developed for Sedgwick County, which serves more diverse populations than
other urban areas, could also serve as a toolkit across the state.

      We now turn to the committee's recommendations for addressing each of
these opportunities and the recommended timeline for implementation.




                                        22
                                  Part 3:
                  Committee's Immediate Recommendations
                  and Proposed Timeline for Implementation


1. Recommendations Requiring Immediate Action
   (0-6 months)

  1.1.   Continuing the Committee's Work. The Ad Hoc Committee for Best
         Practices in Eviction Proceedings should continue its work, with
         replacement members appointed as needed, to oversee the
         implementation of these recommendations and provide expertise and
         stability throughout the process—at least for the next 18 months.


  1.2.   Kansas Emergency Rental Assistance Information. Kansas courts should
         uniformly provide information about KERA funds early in the eviction
         process.

         1.2.1. In all residential eviction case for nonpayment of rent, judges
                should remind the parties about the availability of rental
                assistance funds at the answer docket. This information can be
                provided via a bench card for judges who preside over eviction
                proceedings and can be updated by the Office of Judicial
                Administration as necessary. Judges should grant continuances if
                both parties are interested in pursuing rental assistance.

         1.2.2. In districts where the answer docket is not conducted as a
                traditional hearing, the same statement can be made in a
                handout for all tenants or property owners who appear.

         1.2.3. The summons for residential evictions for nonpayment of rent
                should contain the following statement in both English and
                Spanish, either in the summons itself or as an attachment to the
                summons:




                                       23
             “You may be able to have some of the rent you owe paid and
             stop your eviction. Find out more about available rental
             assistance programs in your area at
             https://kshousingcorp.org/emergency-rental-assistance/.”


1.3.   Development of Voluntary Eviction Resolution Program. The Kansas
       Supreme Court, through this committee and in association with the
       Office of Judicial Administration's Alternative Dispute Resolution
       director, should develop a model Voluntary Eviction Resolution Program
       that district courts may implement to provide an alternative to eviction.

       1.3.1. To maximize impact, a pilot program for dispute resolution
              should be developed for Sedgwick County, in accordance with
              the recent grant application to the Eviction Diversion Initiative by
              the National Center for State Courts. This committee should act
              as a resource as Sedgwick County works to implement a
              voluntary pilot program to resolve evictions outside of court.

       1.3.2. Based on the Sedgwick County model, the Judiciary should
              expand opportunities for resolving eviction cases before trial by
              establishing a Voluntary Eviction Resolution Program (VERP). The
              VERP would a court-employed facilitator who would be present at
              the answer docket to answer questions about the eviction process
              for tenants and property owners. The facilitator would also be
              equipped to conduct mediation to assist in resolving the eviction
              claims.




                                      24
2. Recommendations Regarding Education, Outreach, and Data Collection
   (0-12 months)

  2.1.   Creating Educational Reference Videos. The Office of Judicial
         Administration, Kansas Supreme Court Access to Justice Committee, or
         other appropriate entity should coordinate the creation of a series of
         informational videos that would help unrepresented property owners
         and tenants understand their rights and obligations in a tenancy and
         explain the steps in the eviction process. These videos could be posted
         on court websites. The script for the videos should be created by a
         committee of legal professionals, including advocates for property
         owners and tenants alike. The videos should cover:

          Pre-tenancy and early-tenancy issues like initial walk-through;
          Issues that arise during tenancy like notices to property owners and
           tenants for non-compliance;
          Issues related to termination of a tenancy like providing notice to the
           property owner of the tenant’s new address.


  2.2.   Development of Bench Book. The Office of Judicial Administration,
         Kansas Supreme Court Judicial Education Committee, or other
         appropriate entity should develop a desktop reference for judges
         (a bench book) to establish uniform baseline standards for eviction
         proceedings and to disseminate statewide best practices in eviction
         matters. The bench book should include the following:

         2.2.1. A summary of Kansas landlord-tenant law for reference.
         2.2.2. A decision-tree reflecting a model initial hearing for contested
                eviction proceedings covering the most common decisions a
                judge might make and their consequences.
         2.2.3. A model script for initial eviction hearings to apprise the parties
                of their rights in the proceeding and their responsibilities to one
                another as well as the court.



                                        25
       2.2.4. A Lawful Alternative Resolutions Catalog detailing non-trial
              resolutions to common landlord-tenant issues.
       2.2.5. A model process for applying for and adjudicating motions for
              stays from Writs of Restitution.
       2.2.6. A supplement discussing and promoting best practices in
              establishing bonds in eviction matters and a model process for
              the posting of them with the clerk of the district court.

2.3.   Educating Young Adults Before They Sign a Lease. The Kansas Supreme
       Court should encourage attorneys, bar associations, and nonprofit legal
       service providers to develop and present landlord-tenant seminars in
       high schools across Kansas.

2.4.   Odyssey. The Office of Judicial Administration should work with the
       Odyssey developers to ensure the case management program captures
       meaningful data relating to evictions. This data might include:

           distinguishing cases by general eviction category (residential and
            commercial) and reason for filing (nonpayment of rent, other
            violations of the lease, expired leases, and return of property).
           case disposition, to capture information about whether a case
            went to judgment after a trial, was settled, or had some other
            outcome.
           zip codes of the rental properties in question, as there may be
            different socio-economic factors in different areas of a county or
            judicial district, to allow for more effective use of resources and
            outreach efforts.
           whether parties opted to seek alternative resolution of the
            dispute and whether mediation was successful.




                                      26
3. Recommendations Regarding Judicial Council Forms
   (6-18 months)

  3.1.   The Judicial Council, in collaboration with the Kansas Supreme Court
         Access to Justice Committee and attorneys who regularly represent
         clients in eviction proceedings, should amend the following existing
         forms:

         3.1.1. 3-day notice to pay rent or quit. This notice should be amended
                to specifically state that property owner reserves right to evict the
                tenant even if the owner accepts payment for a portion of rent
                owed. The form should also be amended to allow a property
                owner to inform a tenant of his or her right to cure any
                deficiencies to reduce unintentional procedural defaults by
                property owners.

         3.1.2. Summons. The summons should be amended to incorporate clear
                instructions to the defendant tenant on how to update their
                address with the court. The summons should also include a copy
                of the Judicial Council's answer form (similar to current process in
                small claims and garnishment cases).

         3.1.3. Petition. The petition should be amended to state how many days
                the tenant was given to cure any deficiency and when notice was
                served.

         3.1.4. Answer. The answer should be amended to provide a reference to
                where tenants may find affirmative defenses or counterclaims
                available in an eviction proceeding.

         3.1.5. Journal entry. The journal entry form should be amended to make
                clear whether property owner reserves right to pursue damages
                after he or she obtains possession of the premises.




                                         27
3.2.   The Judicial Council, in collaboration with the Kansas Supreme Court
       Access to Justice Committee and attorneys who regularly represent
       clients in eviction proceedings, should develop additional forms for
       eviction proceedings:

       3.2.1. 14-30 day notice of landlord noncompliance. A new form should
              be created so a tenant can indicate whether a property owner's
              breach is material noncompliance, noncompliance affecting
              health and safety, or both; allow a space for the tenant to
              describe the issue; and state the deadline for compliance.

       3.2.2. 14-30 day notice of tenant noncompliance. A new form should be
              created so a property owner can indicate whether a tenant's
              breach is material noncompliance, noncompliance affecting
              health and safety, or both; allow a space for the property owner
              to describe the issue; and state the deadline for compliance.

       3.2.3. Tenant notice of payment of rent under protest due to (1)
              landlord’s failure to maintain and/or (2) destruction by fire &/or
              casualty. A new form should be created so a tenant can explain
              any problems with the conditions of the property, damage to the
              unit, description of part of unit that is no longer usable, and why
              reduction of rent in requested amount is reasonable.

       3.2.4. Accounting form. A new form should be created that a property
              owner can use to explain security deposit withholding or return
              after a tenant vacates a unit.




                                      28
4. Long-Term Structural Recommendations for Future Consideration
   (18+ months)

  4.1.   The Kansas Supreme Court should consider adopting a court rule (or
         rules) governing eviction procedures to achieve greater uniformity
         among the judicial districts. Such a rule might

             Require a property owner to attach a copy of the rental
              agreement (if in writing) and applicable notice to the petition.
             Require a property owner to submit a Landlord Case Information
              Statement that would capture pertinent information and would
              support case management and allow for an efficient, early review
              of the case by judges and court staff.
             Require a tenant to submit a Tenant Case Information Statement
              that would use plain language to capture key information,
              including the tenant's contact information.


  4.2.   The Kansas Supreme Court, in coordination with the Judicial Council,
         should consider recommending updates to Kansas statutes to clarify the
         law relating to evictions and modernize the process. Such amendments
         might include, among other clarifications:

               Requiring all petitions to affirmatively plead the jurisdictional
                basis of the petition and attach proof of compliance with key
                statutory mandates.
               Eliminating newspaper publication requirements for property
                owners who are disposing of abandoned property.
               Establishing a list of the tenant's and property owner's respective
                rights and responsibilities, and requiring property owners to
                include this information with every rental agreement.




                                        29
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

50-7a01.   Consumer information; security breach; definitions. As used in K.S.A. 50-7a01 and 50-
7a02, and amendments thereto:
(a) "Consumer" means an individual who is a resident of this state.
(b) "Encrypted" means transformation of data through the use of algorithmic process
into a form in which there is a low probability of assigning meaning without the use of a
confidential process or key, or securing the information by another method that renders
the data elements unreadable or unusable.
(c) "Notice" means:
(1) Written notice;
(2) electronic notice, if the notice provided is consistent with the provisions regarding
electronic records and signatures set forth in 15 U.S.C. § 7001; or
(3) substitute notice, if the individual or the commercial entity required to provide
notice demonstrates that the cost of providing notice will exceed $100,000, or that the
affected class of consumers to be notified exceeds 5,000, or that the individual or the
commercial entity does not have sufficient contact information to provide notice.
(d) "Redact" means alteration or truncation of data such that no more than the
following are accessible as part of the personal information:
(1) Five digits of a social security number; or
(2) the last four digits of a driver's license number, state identification card number or
account number.
(e) "Substitute notice" means:
(1) E-mail notice if the individual or the commercial entity has e-mail addresses for the
affected class of consumers;
(2) conspicuous posting of the notice on the web site page of the individual or the
commercial entity if the individual or the commercial entity maintains a web site; and
(3) notification to major statewide media.
(f) "Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, estate, cooperative,
association, government, or governmental subdivision or agency or other entity.
(g) "Personal information" means a consumer's first name or first initial and last name
linked to any one or more of the following data elements that relate to the consumer,
when the data elements are neither encrypted nor redacted:
(1) Social security number;
(2) driver's license number or state identification card number; or
(3) financial account number, or credit or debit card number, alone or in combination
with any required security code, access code or password that would permit access to a
consumer's financial account. The term "personal information" does not include
publicly available information that is lawfully made available to the general public from
federal, state or local government records.
(h) "Security breach" means the unauthorized access and acquisition of unencrypted
or unredacted computerized data that compromises the security, confidentiality or
integrity of personal information maintained by an individual or a commercial entity
and that causes, or such individual or entity reasonably believes has caused or will
cause, identity theft to any consumer. Good faith acquisition of personal information by
an employee or agent of an individual or a commercial entity for the purposes of the
individual or the commercial entity is not a breach of the security of the system,
provided that the personal information is not used for or is not subject to further
unauthorized disclosure.
History: L. 2006, ch. 149, § 3; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

50-7a02.   Security breach; requirements. (a) A person that conducts business in this state, or
a government, governmental subdivision or agency that owns or licenses computerized
data that includes personal information shall, when it becomes aware of any breach of
the security of the system, conduct in good faith a reasonable and prompt investigation
to determine the likelihood that personal information has been or will be misused. If the
investigation determines that the misuse of information has occurred or is reasonably
likely to occur, the person or government, governmental subdivision or agency shall
give notice as soon as possible to the affected Kansas resident. Notice must be made in
the most expedient time possible and without unreasonable delay, consistent with the
legitimate needs of law enforcement and consistent with any measures necessary to
determine the scope of the breach and to restore the reasonable integrity of the
computerized data system.
(b) An individual or a commercial entity that maintains computerized data that
includes personal information that the individual or the commercial entity does not
own or license shall give notice to the owner or licensee of the information of any
breach of the security of the data following discovery of a breach, if the personal
information was, or is reasonably believed to have been, accessed and acquired by an
unauthorized person.
(c) Notice required by this section may be delayed if a law enforcement agency
determines that the notice will impede a criminal investigation. Notice required by this
section shall be made in good faith, without unreasonable delay and as soon as possible
after the law enforcement agency determines that notification will no longer impede the
investigation.
(d) Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, an individual or a commercial
entity that maintains its own notification procedures as part of an information security
policy for the treatment of personal information, and whose procedures are otherwise
consistent with the timing requirements of this section, is deemed to be in compliance
with the notice requirements of this section if the individual or the commercial entity
notifies affected consumers in accordance with its policies in the event of a breach of
security of the system.
(e) An individual or a commercial entity that is regulated by state or federal law and
that maintains procedures for a breach of the security of the system pursuant to the
laws, rules, regulations, guidances or guidelines established by its primary or functional
state or federal regulator is deemed to be in compliance with this section. This section
does not relieve an individual or a commercial entity from a duty to comply with other
requirements of state and federal law regarding the protection and privacy of personal
information.
(f) In the event that a person discovers circumstances requiring notification pursuant
to this section of more than 1,000 consumers at one time, the person shall also notify,
without unreasonable delay, all consumer reporting agencies that compile and maintain
files on consumers on a nationwide basis, as defined by 15 U.S.C. § 1681a(p), of the
timing, distribution and content of the notices.
(g) For violations of this section, except as to insurance companies licensed to do
business in this state, the attorney general is empowered to bring an action in law or
equity to address violations of this section and for other relief that may be appropriate.
The provisions of this section are not exclusive and do not relieve an individual or a
commercial entity subject to this section from compliance with all other applicable
provisions of law.
(h) For violations of this section by an insurance company licensed to do business in
this state, the insurance commissioner shall have the sole authority to enforce the
provisions of this section.
History: L. 2006, ch. 149, § 4; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

50-7a04.   Severability clause. If any provision of this act or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect any other provision or
application of the act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application. To this end the provisions of this act are severable.
History: L. 2006, ch. 149, § 15; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1601.   Short title. This act shall be known and may be cited as the uniform electronic
transactions act.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 1; July 1.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1602. Definitions. In this act:
(a) "Agreement" means the bargain of the parties in fact, as found in their language or
inferred from other circumstances and from rules, regulations, and procedures given
the effect of agreements under laws otherwise applicable to a particular transaction.
(b) "Automated transaction" means a transaction conducted or performed, in whole or
in part, by electronic means or electronic records, in which the acts or records of one or
both parties are not reviewed by an individual in the ordinary course in forming a
contract, performing under an existing contract or fulfilling an obligation required by
the transaction.
(c) "Computer program" means a set of statements or instructions to be used directly
or indirectly in an information processing system in order to bring about a certain
result.
(d) "Contract" means the total legal obligation resulting from the parties' agreement as
affected by this act and other applicable law.
(e) "Digital signature" means a type of electronic signature consisting of a
transformation of an electronic message using an asymmetric crypto system such that a
person having the initial message and the signer's public key can accurately determine
whether:
(1) The transformation was created using the private key that corresponds to the
signer's public key; and
(2) the initial message has not been altered since the transformation was made.
(f) "Electronic" means relating to technology having electrical, digital, magnetic,
wireless, optical, electromagnetic or similar capabilities.
(g) "Electronic agent" means a computer program or an electronic or other automated
means used independently to initiate an action or respond to electronic records or
performances in whole or in part, without review or action by an individual.
(h) "Electronic record" means a record created, generated, sent, communicated,
received or stored by electronic means.
(i) "Electronic signature" means an electronic sound, symbol or process attached to or
logically associated with a record and executed or adopted by a person with the intent to
sign the record.
(j) "Governmental agency" means an executive, legislative, or judicial agency,
department, board, commission, authority, institution or instrumentality of the federal
government or of a state or of a county, municipality or other political subdivision of a
state.
(k) "Information" means data, text, images, sounds, codes, computer programs,
software, databases or the like.
(l) "Information processing system" means an electronic system for creating,
generating, sending, receiving, storing, displaying or processing information.
(m) "Message" means a digital representation of information.
(n) "Person" means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, governmental agency,
public corporation or any other legal or commercial entity.
(o) "Record" means information that is inscribed on a tangible medium or that is
stored in an electronic or other medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.
(p) "Registered certification authority" means a person providing certification of a
digital signature who is, or is certified by, a member of the group of certification
authorities approved by and registered with the secretary.
(q) "Secretary" means the Kansas secretary of state.
(r) "Security procedure" means a procedure employed for the purpose of verifying that
an electronic signature, record or performance is that of a specific person or for
detecting changes or errors in the information in an electronic record. The term
includes a procedure that requires the use of algorithms or other codes, identifying
words or numbers, encryption, callback or other acknowledgment procedures.
(s) "State" means a state of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the
United States Virgin Islands or any territory or insular possession subject to the
jurisdiction of the United States.
(t) "Transaction" means an action or set of actions occurring between two or more
persons relating to the conduct of business, insurance, health care, commercial or
governmental affairs.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 2; L. 2011, ch. 114, § 35; L. 2012, ch. 166, § 2; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1603.   Scope. (a) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), this act applies to
electronic records and electronic signatures relating to a transaction.
(b) This act does not apply to a transaction to the extent it is governed by:
(1) A law governing the creation and execution of wills, codicils or testamentary trusts;
and
(2) the uniform commercial code, other than K.S.A. 2025 Supp. 84-1-306 and articles 2
and 2a of chapter 84 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and amendments thereto.
(c) This act applies to an electronic record or electronic signature otherwise excluded
from the application of this act under subsection (b) to the extent it is governed by a law
other than those specified in subsection (b).
(d) A transaction subject to this act is also subject to other applicable substantive law.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 3; L. 2007, ch. 89, § 26; July 1, 2008.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1604.   Prospective application. This act applies to any electronic record or electronic
signature created, generated, sent, communicated, received or stored on or after the
effective date of this act.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 4; July 1.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1605.   Use of electronic records and electronic signatures; state agency written standards
governing use of electronic signatures; rules and regulations governing use of digital signatures by
state agencies. (a) This act does not require a record or signature to be created, generated,
sent, communicated, received, stored or otherwise processed or used by electronic
means or in electronic form.
(b) This act applies only to transactions between parties each of which has agreed to
conduct transactions by electronic means. Whether the parties agree to conduct a
transaction by electronic means is determined from the context and surrounding
circumstances, including the parties' conduct.
(c) A party that agrees to conduct a transaction by electronic means may refuse to
conduct other transactions by electronic means. The right granted by this subsection
may not be waived by agreement.
(d) Except as otherwise provided in this act, the effect of any of its provisions may be
varied by agreement. The presence in certain provisions of this act of the words "unless
otherwise agreed", or words of similar import, does not imply that the effect of other
provisions may not be varied by agreement.
(e) Whether an electronic record or electronic signature has legal consequences is
determined by this act and other applicable law.
(f) The uniform electronic transactions act does not require any person to use
electronic signatures.
(g) Any state agency that offers or provides the option of using an electronic signature
to persons doing business with that state agency shall establish written standards
governing the use of those electronic signatures as follows:
(1) On or before December 31, 2002, for electronic signature applications that are in
use by the state agency before July 1, 2002; or
(2) before offering or providing the option of using an electronic signature for any
applications implemented on or after July 1, 2002.
(h) The uniform electronic transactions act does not require any person to use or
permit the use of digital signatures.
(i) The secretary of state shall adopt rules and regulations governing the use of digital
signatures by state agencies. Each state agency offering or providing the option of using
a digital signature to persons doing business with that state agency shall implement
digital signatures in a manner consistent with the regulations of the secretary of state,
except that the state agency may adopt rules and regulations governing that agency's
use of digital signatures that exceed the minimum standards established by the rules
and regulations of the secretary of state.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 5; L. 2002, ch. 183, § 4; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1606.   Construction and application. This act must be construed and applied:
(a) To facilitate electronic transactions consistent with other applicable law;
(b) to be consistent with reasonable practices concerning electronic transactions and
with the continued expansion of those practices; and
(c) to effectuate its general purpose to make uniform the law with respect to the
subject of this act among states enacting it.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 6; July 1.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1607.   Legal recognition of electronic records, electronic signatures and electronic contracts. (a)
A record or signature may not be denied legal effect or enforceability solely because it is
in electronic form.
(b) A contract may not be denied legal effect or enforceability solely because an
electronic record was used in its formation.
(c) If a law requires a record to be in writing, an electronic record satisfies the law.
(d) If a law requires a signature, an electronic signature satisfies the law.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 7; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1608.   Provision of information in writing; presentation of records. (a) If parties have agreed
to conduct a transaction by electronic means and a law requires a person to provide,
send or deliver information in writing to another person, the requirements is satisfied if
the information is provided, sent or delivered, as the case may be, in an electronic
record capable of retention by the recipient at the time of receipt. An electronic record is
not capable of retention by the recipient if the sender or its information processing
system inhibits the ability of the recipient to print or store the electronic record.
(b) If a law other than this act requires a record (1) to be posted or displayed in a
certain manner, (2) to be sent, communicated or transmitted by a specified method, or
(3) to contain information that is formatted in a certain manner, the following rules
apply:
(A) The record must be posted or displayed in the manner specified in the other law.
(B) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(2), the record must be sent,
communicated or transmitted by the method specified in the other law.
(C) The record must contain the information formatted in the manner specified in the
other law.
(c) If a sender inhibits the ability of a recipient to store or print an electronic record,
the electronic record is not enforceable against the recipient.
(d) The requirements of this section may not be varied by agreement, but:
(1) To the extent a law other than this act requires information to be provided, sent or
delivered in writing but permits that requirement to be varied by agreement, the
requirement under subsection (a) that the information be in the form of an electronic
record capable of retention also may be varied by agreement; and
(2) a requirement under a law other than this act to send, communicate or transmit a
record by first-class mail, may be varied by agreement to the extent permitted by the
other law.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 8; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1609.   Attribution and effect of electronic records and electronic signatures. (a) An electronic
record or electronic signature is attributable to a person if it was the act of the person.
The act of the person may be shown in any manner, including a showing of the efficacy
of any security procedure applied to determine the person to which the electronic
record or electronic signature was attributable.
(b) The effect of an electronic record or electronic signature attributed to a person
under subsection (a) is determined from the context and surrounding circumstances at
the time of its creation, execution or adoption, including the parties' agreement, if any,
and otherwise as provided by law.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 9; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1610.   Effect of change or error. If a change or error in an electronic record occurs in a
transmission between parties to a transaction, the following rules apply:
(a) If the parties have agreed to use a security procedure to detect changes or errors
and one party has conformed to the procedure, but the other party has not, and the
nonconforming party would have detected the change or error had that party also
conformed, the conforming party may avoid the effect of the changed or erroneous
electronic record.
(b) In an automated transaction involving an individual, the individual may avoid the
effect of an electronic record that resulted from an error made by the individual in
dealing with the electronic agent of another person if the electronic agent did not
provide an opportunity for the prevention or correction of the error and, at the time the
individual learns of the error, the individual:
(1) Promptly notifies the other person of the error and that the individual did not
intend to be bound by the electronic record received by the other person;
(2) takes reasonable steps, including steps that conform to the other person's
reasonable instruction, to return to the other person or, if instructed by the other
person, to destroy the consideration received, if any, as a result of the erroneous
electronic record; and
(3) has not used or received any benefit or value from the consideration, if any,
received from the other person.
(c) If neither paragraph (a) nor paragraph (b) applies, the change or error has the
effect provided by other law, including the law of mistake, and the parties' contract, if
any.
(d) Subsections (b) and (c) may not be varied by agreement.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 10; July 1.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1611. Notarization and acknowledgment; electronic notarization. If a law requires a signature
or record to be notarized, acknowledged, verified or made under oath, the requirement
is satisfied if the electronic signature of the person authorized to perform those acts,
together with all other information required to be included by other applicable law, is
attached to or logically associated with the signature or record.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 11; L. 2004, ch. 126, § 2; L. 2021, ch. 64, § 32; January 1, 2022.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1612.   Retention of electronic records; originals. (a) If a law requires that a record be
retained, the requirement is satisfied by retaining an electronic record of the
information in the record which:
(1) Accurately reflects the information set forth in the record after it was first
generated in its final form as an electronic record or otherwise; and
(2) remains accessible for later reference.
(b) A requirement to retain a record in accordance with subsection (a) does not apply
to any information the sole purpose of which is to enable the record to be sent,
communicated or received.
(c) A person may satisfy subsection (a) by using the services of another person if the
requirements of that subsection are satisfied.
(d) If a law requires a record to be presented or retained in its original form, or
provides consequences if the record is not presented or retained in its original form,
that law is satisfied by an electronic record retained in accordance with subsection (a).
(e) If a law requires retention of a check, that requirement is satisfied by retention of
an electronic record of the information on the front and back of the check in accordance
with subsection (a).
(f) A record retained as an electronic record in accordance with subsection (a) satisfies
a law requiring a person to retain a record for evidentiary, audit or like purposes, unless
a law enacted after the effective date of this act specifically prohibits the use of an
electronic record for the specified purpose.
(g) This section does not preclude a governmental agency of this state from specifying
additional requirements for the retention of a record subject to the agency's jurisdiction.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 12; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1613.   Admissibility in evidence. In a proceeding, evidence of a record or signature may
not be excluded solely because it is in electronic form.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 13; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1614.   Automated transactions. In an automated transaction, the following rules apply:
(a) A contract may be formed by the interaction of electronic agents of the parties,
even if no individual was aware of or reviewed the electronic agents' actions or the
resulting terms and agreements.
(b) A contract may be formed by the interaction of an electronic agent and an
individual, acting on the individual's own behalf or for another person, including by an
interaction in which the individual performs actions that the individual is free to refuse
to perform and which the individual knows or has reason to know will cause the
electronic agent to complete the transaction or performance.
(c) The terms of the contract are determined by the substantive law applicable to it.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 14; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1615.   Time and place of sending and receipt. (a) Unless otherwise agreed between the
sender and the recipient, an electronic record is sent when it:
(1) Is addressed properly or otherwise directed properly to an information processing
system that the recipient has designated or uses for the purpose of receiving electronic
records or information of the type sent and from which the recipient is able to retrieve
the electronic record;
(2) is in a form capable of being processed by that system; and
(3) enters an information processing system outside the control of the sender or of a
person that sent the electronic record on behalf of the sender or enters a region of the
information processing system designated or used by the recipient which is under the
control of the recipient.
(b) Unless otherwise agreed between a sender and the recipient, an electronic record is
received when:
(1) It enters an information processing system that the recipient has designated or uses
for the purpose of receiving electronic records or information of the type sent and from
which the recipient is able to retrieve the electronic record; and
(2) it is in a form capable of being processed by that system.
(c) Subsection (b) applies even if the place the information processing system is located
is different from the place the electronic record is deemed to be received under
subsection (d).
(d) Unless otherwise expressly provided in the electronic record or agreed between the
sender and the recipient, an electronic record is deemed to be sent from the sender's
place of business and to be received at the recipient's place of business. For purposes of
this subsection, the following rules apply:
(1) If the sender or recipient has more than one place of business, the place of business
of that person is the place having the closest relationship to the underlying transaction.
(2) If the sender or the recipient does not have a place of business, the place of
business is the sender's or recipient's residence, as the case may be.
(e) An electronic record is received under subsection (b) even if no individual is aware
of its receipt.
(f) Receipt of an electronic acknowledgment from an information processing system
described in subsection (b) establishes that a record was received but, by itself, does not
establish that the content sent corresponds to the content received.
(g) If a person is aware that an electronic record purportedly sent under subsection (a),
or purportedly received under subsection (b), was not actually sent or received, the legal
effect of the sending or receipt is determined by other applicable law. Except to the
extent permitted by the other law, the requirements of this subsection may not be
varied by agreement.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 15; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1616.   Transferable records. (a) In this section, "transferable record" means an electronic
record that:
(1) Would be a note under article 3 of chapter 84 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and
amendments thereto, or a document under article 7 of chapter 84 of the Kansas Statutes
Annotated, and amendments thereto, if the electronic record were in writing; and
(2) the issuer of the electronic record expressly has agreed is a transferable record.
(b) A person has control of a transferable record if a system employed for evidencing
the transfer of interests in the transferable record reliably establishes that person as the
person to which the transferable record was issued or transferred.
(c) A system satisfies subsection (b), and a person is deemed to have control of a
transferable record, if the transferable record is created, stored and assigned in such a
manner that:
(1) A single authoritative copy of the transferable record exists which is unique,
identifiable, and, except as otherwise provided in paragraphs (4), (5) and (6),
unalterable;
(2) the authoritative copy identifies the person asserting control as:
(A) The person to which the transferable record was issued; or
(B) if the authoritative copy indicates that the transferable record has been
transferred, the person to which the transferable record was most recently transferred;
(3) the authoritative copy is communicated to and maintained by the person asserting
control or its designated custodian;
(4) copies or revisions that add or change an identified assignee of the authoritative
copy can be made only with the consent of the person asserting control;
(5) each copy of the authoritative copy and any copy of a copy is readily identifiable as
a copy that is not the authoritative copy; and
(6) any revision of the authoritative copy is readily identifiable as authorized or
unauthorized.
(d) Except as otherwise agreed, a person having control of a transferable record is the
holder, as defined in K.S.A. 2025 Supp. 84-1-201(b)(21), and amendments thereto, of the
transferable record and has the same rights and defenses as a holder of an equivalent
record or writing under the uniform commercial code, including, if the applicable
statutory requirements under K.S.A. 84-3-302(a), or 84-9-308, or K.S.A. 2025 Supp. 84-7-
501, and amendments thereto, are satisfied, the rights and defenses of a holder in due
course, a holder to which a negotiable document of title has been duly negotiated, or a
purchaser, respectively. Delivery, possession, and indorsement are not required to
obtain or exercise any of the rights under this subsection.
(e) Except as otherwise agreed, an obligor under a transferable record has the same
rights and defenses as an equivalent obligor under equivalent records or writings under
the uniform commercial code.
(f) If requested by a person against which enforcement is sought, the person seeking to
enforce the transferable record shall provide reasonable proof that the person is in
control of the transferable record. Proof may include access to the authoritative copy of
the transferable record and related business records sufficient to review the terms of
the transferable record and to establish the identity of the person having control of the
transferable record.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 16; L. 2007, ch. 89, § 27; L. 2007, ch. 195, § 8; July 1, 2008.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1617.   Registered certification authorities. (a) Any person, before entering upon the duties
of a registered certification authority, shall:
(1) Register with the secretary on forms approved and provided by the secretary;
(2) pay to the secretary an annual filing fee of $1,000;
(3) file with the secretary a good and sufficient surety bond, certificate of insurance or
other evidence of financial security in the amount of $100,000; and
(4) be approved by the secretary as meeting the requirements of any rules and
regulations adopted by the secretary, as the secretary determines appropriate, to ensure
the person's financial responsibility and condition, character, qualifications and fitness
to be a registered certification authority.
(b) A registered certification authority shall create, maintain and preserve all records
that are necessary to demonstrate compliance with rules and regulations adopted by the
secretary.
(c) If any person who is approved and registered with the secretary as a registered
certification authority fails to maintain any of the qualifications listed in subsection (a)
and (b) or otherwise required by rules and regulations of the secretary, the person's
registration shall be deemed lapsed.
(d) Any person who violates or fails to comply with this section and any provision
related to registered certification authority and the rules and regulations of the
secretary promulgated pursuant to K.S.A. 16-1618, and amendments thereto, upon
notice and hearing, shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000 per failure or
violation.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 17; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1618.   Rules and regulations. The secretary may adopt rules and regulations to
implement the provisions of K.S.A. 16-1617 and 16-1619, and amendments thereto, and
related provisions thereto.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 18; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1619.   Reciprocity with other jurisdictions. The secretary shall have the authority to
establish reciprocity with other states and nations for purposes of K.S.A. 16-1617 and 16-
1618, and amendments thereto, and related provisions thereto.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 19; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

16-1620.   Severability. If any provision of this act or its application to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or
applications of this act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of this act are severable.
History: L. 2000, ch. 120, § 20; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2801.   Citation of act. This act shall be known and may be cited as the code of civil
procedure for limited actions.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 1; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2802.   Application of code. (a) This act may be used to govern the procedure for a civil
lawsuit filed in the district court which:
(1) Seeks judgment for a debt which is not secured by a lien and arises out of a contract
for the providing of goods, services or money, without limitation as to the amount
claimed in the lawsuit;
(2) seeks judgment for a debt which is secured by a lien and arises out of a contract for
the providing of goods, services or money, where the amount claimed in the lawsuit, not
counting costs, interest and fees, does not exceed $25,000; or
(3) seeks judgment where the claim does not arise out of a contract and the amount
claimed in the lawsuit, not counting costs, interest and fees, does not exceed $25,000.
(b) The following types of lawsuits may not be filed under this act:
(1) Actions against any officers of the state, or any subdivisions thereof, for misconduct
in office, except as authorized by the Kansas tort claims act, K.S.A. 75-6101 et seq., and
amendments thereto;
(2) actions for specific performance of contracts for real estate;
(3) actions in which title to real estate is sought to be recovered or in which an interest
in real estate, either legal or equitable, is sought to be established, except that nothing in
this paragraph shall be construed as limiting the right to bring an action for forcible
detainer as provided in K.S.A. 61-3801 through 61-3808, and amendments thereto;
(4) actions to foreclose real estate mortgages or to establish and foreclose liens on real
estate as provided in article 11 of chapter 60 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and
amendments thereto;
(5) actions for divorce, separate maintenance or custody of minor children;
(6) habeas corpus;
(7) receiverships;
(8) change of name;
(9) declaratory judgments;
(10) mandamus and quo warranto;
(11) injunctions;
(12) class actions;
(13) rights of majority; and
(14) any appeal from an order or ruling of an administrative officer or body.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 2; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2803.   Supreme court rules. The supreme court of this state shall adopt rules to govern
the electronic filing of court matters and the storage of and access by the public to the
same and such other matters as is necessary under the code of civil procedure for
limited actions.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 3; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 2; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2804.   Filings. Judicial districts in this state may accept for filing under this act lawsuits
filed in the same method in which lawsuits are filed prior to the adoption of this act, or
filed pursuant to an electronic filing procedure, or a combination of the two, as long as
any such filings comply with the rules of the supreme court of this state.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 4; January 1, 2001.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2805.   Acts by court or judge. Without regard to whether the word "court" or the word
"judge" is used in any provisions of this act, all trials upon the merits shall be conducted
in open court and in a regular courtroom within the county if reasonably possible. All
other acts or proceedings, including the entry of a ruling or judgment, may be done or
conducted by a judge or judge pro tem in chambers, or at such other place within the
county as is designated by the judge for the conduct of court business, without the
attendance of the clerk or other court officials.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 5; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2806.   Construction. The provisions of this act shall be liberally construed to secure the
just, speedy and inexpensive determination of every action or proceeding.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 6; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2901.   Name of parties. The party who files a lawsuit shall be called the plaintiff and the
adverse party shall be called the defendant.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 7; January 1, 2001.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2902.   Commencement of actions, limitations of actions. (a) An action pursuant to the code of
civil procedure for limited actions is commenced at the time of:
(1) Filing a petition with the clerk of the district court, if service of process is obtained
or the first publication is made for service by publication, within 90 days after the
petition is filed, except that the court may extend that time an additional 30 days upon a
showing of good cause by the plaintiff; or
(2) service of process or first publication, if service of process or first publication is not
made within the time specified by provision (1).
(b) If service of process or first publication purports to have been made but is later
adjudicated to have been invalid due to any irregularity in form or procedure or any
defect in making service, the action shall nevertheless be deemed to have been
commenced at the applicable time under subsection (a) if valid service is obtained or
first publication is made within 90 days after that adjudication, except that the court
may extend that time an additional 30 days upon a showing of good cause by the
plaintiff.
(c) An entry of appearance by the defendant shall have the same effect as service of
process on the defendant.
(d) The limitation of time for commencing lawsuits pursuant to the code of civil
procedure for limited actions shall be as provided in article 5 of chapter 60 of the Kansas
Statutes Annotated, and amendments thereto, except where a different limitation is
specifically provided by statute.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 8; January 1, 2001.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2903.   Pleadings and other papers allowed. (a) Pleadings. Only the pleadings set forth in
K.S.A. 60-207, and amendments thereto, shall be allowed in an action commenced
pursuant to the code of civil procedure for limited actions, but the only pleading
required is a petition. Third-party practice in the manner prescribed by K.S.A. 60-214,
and amendments thereto, shall be permitted.
(b) Petitions. A petition shall state the claim or claims which the plaintiff has against
the defendant. It shall set forth the current address, phone number, fax phone number
and electronic mail address for the plaintiff. If the plaintiff is not represented by an
attorney, the petition shall be signed by the plaintiff.
(c) Motions and other papers. An application to the court or judge for an order shall be
by motion which, unless made during a hearing or trial, shall be made in writing, shall
state the particular grounds for the motion, shall set forth the relief or order sought, and
shall contain a notice of when the motion is to be heard by the court.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 9; January 1, 2001.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2904.   Appearance; answer; counter-claim; affirmative defenses. (a) A defendant shall either
appear, in person or by counsel, at the time and date set forth in the summons or file on
or before such date a written answer. If the defendant appears and disputes the petition,
the defendant shall file an answer not later than 14 days after the appearance date. The
defendant shall promptly send a copy of the answer after filing to the plaintiff's attorney
or the plaintiff, if no attorney. If the defendant is not represented by an attorney, the
answer shall be signed by the defendant.
(b) The answer when filed shall state the following:
(1) What the dispute is;
(2) any affirmative defenses the defendant has to the claim; and
(3) the current address, phone number, fax phone number and electronic mail address
for the defendant.
(c) If the defendant asserts a counterclaim against the plaintiff in the answer, the
plaintiff may file a reply disputing the defendant's counterclaim not later than 14 days
after service of the defendant's answer. The plaintiff's reply shall comply with the
requirements set forth in subsection (b). If the plaintiff does not file a reply, the plaintiff
waives the right to present any dispute to the defendant's counterclaim.
(d) Affirmative defenses are those listed in subsection (c) of K.S.A. 60-208, and
amendments thereto.
(e) The date the defendant is required to appear as set forth in the summons may be
continued by the court upon request of either party in such manner as the court shall
prescribe.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 10; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 198; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2905.   Counterclaims and cross-claims. (a) (1) Upon timely application of the plaintiff and
in the discretion of the court, a defendant may be required to plead any counterclaim
which such party has against the plaintiff, if it arises out of the transaction or
occurrence that is the subject matter of the plaintiff's claim and does not require for its
adjudication the presence of third parties of whom the court cannot acquire jurisdiction,
except that the defendant shall not be required to plead any such claim if: (A) At the
time the action was commenced the claim was the subject of another pending action; or
(B) the plaintiff brought suit upon such plaintiff's claim by attachment or other process
by which the court did not acquire jurisdiction to render a personal judgment on that
claim, and the defendant is not pleading any other counterclaim.
(2) A defendant shall not be estopped from asserting in a subsequent action any claim
which such defendant may have against the plaintiff, if such defendant is not required
to plead such claim pursuant to this section. Except as provided in subsections (a) and
(k), the provisions of K.S.A. 60-213, and amendments thereto, relating to counterclaims
and cross-claims, shall apply to proceedings pursuant to the code of civil procedure for
limited actions, subject to the provisions of K.S.A. 61-2911, and amendments thereto.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), in an action involving a claim
governed by K.S.A. 60-258a, and amendments thereto, a party shall state as a
counterclaim any claim that party has against any opposing party arising out of the
transaction or occurrence that is the subject matter of the claim governed by K.S.A. 60-
258a, and amendments thereto.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 11; January 1, 2001.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2907.   Service and filing of pleadings and other papers. (a) The petition shall be served on
the defendant in accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. 61-3001 through 61-3006, and
amendments thereto.
(b) All pleadings other than the petition, motions which cannot be heard ex parte,
notices, and orders which are required by their terms to be served, shall be served upon
the party's attorney of record, if the party is represented by an attorney, or upon the
party if not represented by an attorney, in the following manner:
(1) By delivering a copy;
(2) by mailing a copy by first-class mail, certified mail or registered mail to the last
known address; or
(3) if no address is known, by leaving a copy with the clerk of the court. For the
purposes of this subsection, delivering a copy means: Handing it to the attorney or to the
party; leaving it at the attorney's or party's office with the person in charge thereof or, if
there is no one in charge, leaving it in a conspicuous place therein; or, if the attorney's
or party's office is closed or the person to be served has no office, leaving it at the
attorney's or party's dwelling house or usual place of abode with some person of
suitable age and discretion then residing therein. Service by mail is complete upon
mailing. All such pleadings, motions, notices and orders covered by this subsection shall
be filed with the court either before service or within a reasonable time thereafter.
(c) The filing of pleadings and other papers with the court as required or permitted by
this act shall be done in accordance with rules or orders of the supreme court.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 13; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 3; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2908.   Special matters. The provisions of K.S.A. 60-209, 60-210 and 60-211, and
amendments thereto, shall apply to pleadings filed under K.S.A. 61-2901 through 61-
2912, and amendments thereto.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 14; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2909.   Computation and extension of time. The provisions of K.S.A. 60-206, and
amendments thereto, governing the computation and extension of time, shall govern
actions pursuant to the code of civil procedure for limited actions, except where
provisions to the contrary are specifically included in the code.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 15; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2910.   Application of chapter 60, when. Upon motion of any party and for good cause
shown, the court may order that an action filed under the code of civil procedure for
limited actions, except an action filed pursuant to the small claims procedure act, article
27 of chapter 61 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and amendments thereto, shall
thereafter be governed by the provisions of chapter 60 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated,
and amendments thereto. The party obtaining an order under this section shall pay any
additional docket fee required had the action been filed under chapter 60 of the Kansas
Statutes Annotated, and amendments thereto. Upon such order of the court and
payment of any additional docket fee, the clerk of the district court shall renumber the
case as a case filed under chapter 60 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and amendments
thereto, in the same manner as required by K.S.A. 60-2418, and amendments thereto.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 16; L. 2002, ch. 66, § 1; April 25.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2911.   Claims beyond the scope of actions authorized by K.S.A. 61-2802. (a) Whenever a
plaintiff demands judgment beyond the scope of actions authorized by the provisions of
K.S.A. 61-2802, and amendments thereto, the court shall either:
(1) Transfer the action to the chief judge of the judicial district for assignment and
hearing pursuant to chapter 60 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and amendments
thereto, assessing the increased docket fee to the plaintiff; or (2) allow the plaintiff to
amend the pleadings and service of process to bring the demand for judgment within
the scope of actions authorized by the provisions of K.S.A. 61-2802, and amendments
thereto, assessing the costs accrued to the plaintiff.
(b) If a defendant asserts a counterclaim or cross-claim beyond the scope of the code of
civil procedure for limited actions, the case shall be referred by the chief judge for
assignment and hearing pursuant to chapter 60 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and
amendments thereto, assessing the increased docket fee to the defendant.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 17; January 1, 2001.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

61-2912.   Adoption by reference of certain provisions of article 2 of chapter 60. The following
provisions of article 2 of chapter 60 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated, and amendments
thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this act as if fully set forth
herein, insofar as such provisions are not inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions
of this act:
(a) K.S.A. 60-215, and amendments thereto, relating to amended and supplemental
pleadings, except that the time for filing amended pleadings and for responding thereto
shall be 14 instead of 21 days;
(b) K.S.A. 60-217, and amendments thereto, relating to capacity of parties;
(c) K.S.A. 60-218, and amendments thereto, providing for joinder of claims and
remedies, K.S.A. 60-219 and 60-220, and amendments thereto, providing for joinder of
parties, and K.S.A. 60-221, and amendments thereto, relating to misjoinder of parties and
claims;
(d) K.S.A. 60-224, and amendments thereto, relating to intervention, and K.S.A. 60-225,
and amendments thereto, providing for substitution of parties;
(e) K.S.A. 60-234, and amendments thereto, relating to production of documents and
things for inspection;
(f) K.S.A. 60-241, and amendments thereto, providing for dismissal of actions;
(g) K.S.A. 60-244, and amendments thereto, providing for proof of records;
(h) K.S.A. 60-252, and amendments thereto, concerning findings and conclusions by the
court, except that when the findings and conclusions are made by a district magistrate
judge, the time to file a motion for amended or additional findings is 14 instead of 28
days;
(i) K.S.A. 60-256, and amendments thereto, relating to summary judgment;
(j) K.S.A. 60-259, and amendments thereto, concerning new trial, except that the time to
file a motion for new trial or to alter or amend judgment when a judgment is rendered
by a district magistrate judge is 14 instead of 28 days;
(k) K.S.A. 60-260, and amendments thereto, concerning relief from judgment or order;
(l) K.S.A. 60-261 and 60-263, and amendments thereto, relating respectively to harmless
error and disability of a judge; and
(m) K.S.A. 60-264, and amendments thereto, relating to process in behalf of and against
persons not parties.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 18; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 199; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3001.   Summons; issuance. Upon the filing of the petition pursuant to the code of civil
procedure for limited actions, the clerk of the district court shall issue a summons for
service upon each defendant in accordance with this act. Additional summonses may be
issued as requested.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 19; January 1, 2001.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3002.   Summons; time for appearance; form. (a) The summons shall be issued by the clerk
and dated the day it is issued. The summons shall state the time when the law requires
the defendant to appear or file an answer in response to the petition, and shall notify
such defendant that in case of such defendant's failure to appear or file an answer,
judgment by default will be rendered against such defendant for the relief demanded in
the petition.
(b) The time stated in the summons requiring the defendant to appear in response to
the petition shall be determined by the court. Such time shall be not less than 14 nor
more than 50 days after the date the summons is issued.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 20; L. 2002, ch. 157, § 4; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 200; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3003.   Methods of service of process. (a) Methods of service of process within this state,
except service by publication, are described in this section. Service of process outside
the state shall be made in substantial compliance with the applicable provisions of K.S.A.
60-308, and amendments thereto.
(b) Who serves process. The sheriff of the county in which the action is filed shall serve
any process by any method authorized by this section, or as otherwise provided by law,
unless a party, either personally or through an attorney, elects to undertake
responsibility for service and so notifies the clerk.
(c) Service by return receipt delivery.
(1) Service of process by return receipt delivery shall include service effected by
certified mail, priority mail, commercial courier service, overnight delivery service, or
other reliable personal delivery service to the party addressed, in each instance
evidenced by a written or electronic receipt showing to whom delivered, date of
delivery, address where delivered, and person or entity effecting delivery.
(2) The sheriff, party or party's attorney shall cause a copy of the process and petition
or other document to be placed in a sealed envelope addressed to the person to be
served in accordance with K.S.A. 61-3004, and amendments thereto, with postage or
other delivery fees prepaid, and the sealed envelope placed in the custody of the person
or entity effecting delivery.
(3) Service of process shall be considered obtained under K.S.A. 61-2902, and
amendments thereto, upon the delivery of the sealed envelope.
(4) After service and return of the receipt, the sheriff, party, or party's attorney shall
execute a return on service stating the nature of the process, to whom delivered, the
date of delivery, the address where delivered, and the person or entity effecting
delivery. The original return of service shall be filed with the clerk, along with a copy of
the return receipt evidencing such delivery.
(5) If the sealed envelope is returned with an endorsement showing refusal to accept
delivery, the sheriff, party or the party's attorney may send a copy of the process and
petition or other document by first-class mail addressed to the party to be served, or
may elect other methods of service. If mailed, service shall be considered obtained three
days after the mailing by first-class mail, postage prepaid, which shall be evidenced by a
certificate of service filed with the clerk. If the unopened envelope sent first-class mail is
returned as undelivered for any reason, the sheriff, party or party's attorney shall file an
amended certificate of service with the clerk indicating nondelivery, and service by such
mailing shall not be considered obtained. Mere failure to claim return receipt delivery is
not refusal of service within the meaning of this subsection.
(d) Personal and residence service.
(1) The party may file a written request with the clerk for personal or residence
service. Personal service shall be made by delivering or offering to deliver a copy of the
process and accompanying documents to the person to be served. Residence service
shall be made by leaving a copy of the process and petition, or other document to be
served, at the dwelling house or usual place of abode of the person to be served with
some person of suitable age and discretion residing therein. If service cannot be made
upon an individual, other than a minor or a disabled person, by personal or residence
service, service may be made by leaving a copy of the process and petition, or other
document to be served, at the defendant's dwelling house or usual place of abode and
mailing a notice that such copy has been left at such house or place of abode to the
individual by first-class mail.
(2) When process is to be served under this subsection, the clerk of the court shall
deliver the process and sufficient copies of the process and petition, or other document
to be served, to the sheriff of the county where the process is to be served or, if
requested, to a person appointed to serve process or to the plaintiff's attorney.
(3) Service, levy and execution of all process under this subsection, including, but not
limited to, writs of execution, orders of attachment, replevin orders, orders for delivery,
writs of restitution and writs of assistance, shall be made by a sheriff within the sheriff's
county, by the sheriff's deputy, by an attorney admitted to the practice of law before the
supreme court of Kansas, by a person licensed as a private detective pursuant to K.S.A.
75-7b01 et seq., and amendments thereto, or by some person appointed as a process
server by a judge or clerk of the district court, except that a subpoena may also be
served by any other person who is not a party and is not less than 18 years of age.
Process servers shall be appointed freely and may be authorized either to serve process
in a single case or in cases generally during a fixed period of time. A process server,
authorized attorney or licensed private detective may make the service anywhere in or
out of the state and shall be allowed the fees prescribed in K.S.A. 28-110, and
amendments thereto, for the sheriff and such other fees and costs as the court shall
allow. All persons authorized under this subsection to serve, levy and execute process
shall be considered an "officer" as used in K.S.A. 60-706 and 60-2401, and amendments
thereto.
(4) In all cases when the person to be served, or an agent authorized by the person to
accept service of process, refuses to receive copies thereof, the offer of the duly
authorized process server to deliver copies thereof, and the refusal, shall be a sufficient
service of the process.
(e) Publication service. Service of process by publication may be made pursuant to the
provisions of K.S.A. 60-307, and amendments thereto, which are not inconsistent or in
conflict with this act.
(f) Acknowledgment or appearance. An acknowledgment of service on the summons is
equivalent to service. The voluntary appearance by a defendant is equivalent to service
as of the date of appearance.
(g) In addition to other methods listed in this section, the person serving process may
serve a garnishment process in any of the following methods:
(1) First class mail. Process may be sent to a person by first-class mail by placing a copy
of the process and petition or other document to be served in an envelope addressed to
the person to be served in accordance with K.S.A. 61-3004, and amendments thereto, at
such person's last known address. The envelope used for such service shall be addressed
to the person in accordance with K.S.A. 61-3004, and amendments thereto, and shall
contain adequate postage. Such envelope shall be sealed and placed in the United States
mail. Service by first-class mail shall be complete when the envelope is placed in the
mail unless returned undelivered. Service shall be considered obtained upon the
mailing by first-class mail unless returned undelivered.
(2) Telefacsimile communication. Process may be sent to a person by telefacsimile
communication at a telefacsimile number designated by the garnishee. Service is
complete upon receipt of a confirmation generated by the transmitting machine.
(3) Internet electronic mail. Process may be sent to a person by internet electronic mail
at an internet electronic mail address designated by the garnishee and as provided in
the rules to be adopted hereunder by the supreme court. Service is complete upon
receipt of a reply generated by the garnishee.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 21; L. 2002, ch. 198, § 1; L. 2009, ch. 43, § 2; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3004.   Service of process; time limits; on whom service made. (a) Service shall be made
promptly and, in any event, in time to make a timely return of service as required by
K.S.A. 61-3005, and amendments thereto.
(b) If the defendant is a nonresident who is employed in this state, or if the place of
residence of the defendant is unknown, the plaintiff may direct that the service of
summons or other process shall be made by directing an officer, partner, managing or
general agent, or the person having charge of the office or place of employment at
which the defendant is employed, to make the defendant available for the purpose of
permitting the summons or other process to be served on the defendant at the
defendant's place of employment.
(c) As used in this section, "serving" means making service by any of the methods
described in K.S.A. 61-3003, and amendments thereto, unless a specific method of
making service is prescribed in this section. Except for service by publication, service of
process shall be made as follows:
(1) Service upon an individual other than a minor or disabled person shall be made by
serving the individual or by serving an agent authorized by appointment or by law to
receive service of process, but if the agent is one designated by statute to receive service,
such further notice as the statute requires shall be given. Service by certified mail or
first-class mail shall be addressed to an individual at the individual's dwelling house or
usual place of abode and to an authorized agent at the agent's usual or designated
address.
(2) Service upon a minor, disabled person as defined by K.S.A. 77-201, and
amendments thereto, foreign or domestic corporations, partnerships, insurance
companies or associations shall be made in accordance with the applicable provisions of
K.S.A. 60-304, and amendments thereto.
(3) Service upon a governmental entity shall be made in accordance with the
applicable provisions of K.S.A. 60-304, and amendments thereto.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 22; L. 2002, ch. 114, § 73; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3005.   Proof of service. Proof of service shall be made as follows:
(a) Personal and residence service. (1) Every officer to whom summons or other
process shall be delivered for service within or without the state, shall make return
thereof in writing stating the time, place and manner of service of such writ, and shall
sign such officer's name to such return.
(2) If such process is directed to and delivered to a person other than by an officer for
service, such person shall make affidavit as to the time, place and manner of such
person's service thereof.
(b) Service by return receipt delivery. Service by return receipt delivery shall be
proven in the manner provided by subsection (e) of K.S.A. 60-308 or subsection (c) of
K.S.A. 61-3003, and amendments thereto.
(c) Publication service. Service by publication shall be proven by an affidavit showing
the dates upon, and the newspaper in which the notice of publication was published. A
copy of the notice shall be attached to the affidavit which shall be filed in the cause.
When mailing of copies of the publication notice is required in accordance with
subsection (e) of K.S.A. 60-307, and amendments thereto, the proof of such mailing shall
be by affidavit of the person who mailed such copies and such affidavit shall be filed
with the clerk of the court in which the action has been filed. Any return receipt shall be
made a part of the affidavit and filed therewith.
(d) Time for return. The officer or other person receiving a summons or other process
in forcible detainer cases shall make return of service promptly and, in any event, no
later than three days before the date stated in the summons for the defendant to either
appear or plead to the petition. In all other cases return of service shall be made
promptly and, in any event, no later than five days before the date stated in the
summons for the defendant to either appear or plead to the petition. If the process
cannot be served as directed, it shall be returned to the court forthwith with a statement
of the reason for the failure to serve the same.
(e) Amendment of return. At any time in the judge's discretion and upon such terms as
the judge deems just, the judge may allow any process, return or proof of service thereof
to be amended, unless it clearly appears that material prejudice would result to the
substantial rights of the party against whom the process issued.
(f) Garnishment service of process. (1) First class mail. The return shall show the
nature of the process, the date on which the process was mailed and the name and
address on the envelope containing the process.
(2) Telefacsimile communication. The return shall show the nature of the process, the
time and date on which the process was transmitted by telefacsimile, the telephone
number of the transmitting machine and the telephone number of the receiving
machine.
(3) Internet electronic mail. The return shall show the nature of the process, the time
and date on which the process was transmitted by internet electronic mail, the internet
electronic mail address of the transmitting person and the internet electronic mail
address of the receiving person.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 23; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3006.   Service of process outside the state. (a) (1) Service of process may be made upon any
party outside the state. If upon a person domiciled in this state or upon a person who
has submitted to the jurisdiction of the courts of this state, it shall have the force and
effect of service of process within this state; otherwise it shall have the force and effect
of service by publication.
(2) The service of process shall be made in the same manner as service within this
state, by any officer authorized to make service of process in this state or in the state
where the defendant is served. No order of a court is required. An affidavit, or any other
competent proofs, of the server shall be filed stating the time, manner and place of
service. The court may consider the affidavit, or any other competent proofs, in
determining whether service has been properly made.
(3) The time stated in the summons requiring the defendant to appear in response to
the petition shall be determined by the court. Such time shall be not less than 14 nor
more than 50 days after the date the summons is issued, except as provided in
subsection (a)(3) of K.S.A. 60-308, and amendments thereto.
(b) The provisions of subsection (b) of K.S.A. 60-308, and amendments thereto, shall be
used to determine whether a person has submitted to the jurisdiction of this state.
(c) Service of process upon any person who is subject to the jurisdiction of the courts of
this state, as provided in subsection (b), may be made by serving the process upon the
defendant outside this state, as provided in subsection (a)(2), with the same force and
effect as though process had been served within this state, but only causes of action
arising from acts enumerated in subsection (b) may be asserted against a defendant in
an action in which jurisdiction over the defendant is based upon this subsection.
(d) Nothing contained in this section limits or affects the right to serve any process in
any other manner provided by law.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 24; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 201; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3101.   Admission of facts and genuineness of documents; withdrawal or amendment of admission.
(a) When an answer has been filed in an action or if the defendant appears and disputes
the claims in the petition commenced pursuant to the provisions of the code of civil
procedure for limited actions, any party may submit to any other party a written
request for that party to admit:
(1) The genuineness of any relevant document described in and attached to the
request; or
(2) the truth of any relevant matter of fact set forth in the request. The request shall be
in a form which will permit the party to whom it is submitted to answer the questions
on the request form under oath. A request for admissions may not contain more than 10
requests unless permission of the court is obtained to increase the number.
(b) Each of the matters requested shall be deemed to be admitted for purposes of the
pending lawsuit, unless within 14 days after the request is served, the party to whom the
request is directed submits to the party propounding the request either:
(1) A sworn statement denying specifically the matters requested; or
(2) written objections on the ground that some or all of the requested admissions are
privileged or irrelevant or that the request is otherwise improper in whole or in part.
(c) If the answering party cannot truthfully admit or deny a request, the party shall set
forth in detail the reasons why. If the answering party denies a request, the denial shall
be in good faith and shall fairly address the substance of the request. If in good faith the
answering party can deny only a part of the request or qualify a request, the party shall
specify which part is admitted and qualify or deny the remaining part. If the answering
party objects to a request, the party shall notify the court and the party propounding the
request and schedule a hearing on the objection to be held within 14 days after making
the objection.
(d) The judge may permit withdrawal or amendment of any admission made by
nonresponse when the party to whom the admissions were sent shows good cause for
failure to respond and shows evidence that the admission is not true and the party who
obtained the admission fails to satisfy the judge that withdrawal or amendment will
prejudice such party in maintaining such party's action or defense on the merits. In the
event such withdrawal or amendment is made by the party to whom the admissions
were sent at trial, the party who obtained the admissions shall be allowed a continuance
of the trial setting. Any admission made by a party under this section is for the purpose
of the pending action only and is not an admission by such party for any other purpose
nor may it be used against such party in any other proceeding.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 25; L. 2004, ch. 176, § 4; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 202; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3102.   Expenses on refusal to admit truth of matter requested. If a party to whom a request
for admission has been submitted denies under oath any matter requested, and the
party submitting the request later proves the genuineness of any document or the truth
of any matter of fact denied by the answering party, the party submitting the request
may ask the court for an order requiring the answering party to pay the reasonable
expenses incurred in making such proof, including reasonable attorney fees. The court
shall enter the order unless the court finds that there were good reasons for the denial
or that the admissions sought were of no substantial importance.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 26; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3103.   Interrogatories. (a) Any party may submit to any other party up to 10
interrogatories. The party receiving the interrogatories shall submit answers or
objections, if any, to the party submitting the same within 14 days after the
interrogatories are submitted to the receiving party. On motion, the court may allow a
longer time to answer or may permit a greater number of interrogatories to be
submitted.
(b) The provisions of K.S.A. 60-233, and amendments thereto, shall be applicable to
interrogatories pursuant to this section, except that the provisions of this section
relating to the time when interrogatories are to be answered shall be applicable. The
general discovery provisions of subsections (b), (c) and (e) of K.S.A. 60-226, and
amendments thereto, and the sanction provisions of K.S.A. 60-237, and amendments
thereto, as such sections relate to interrogatories, shall be applicable to interrogatories
pursuant to this section.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 27; L. 2010, ch. 135, § 203; July 1.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3104.   Subpoenas. Subpoenas may be issued by the clerk of the district court under the
seal of such court or by the judge to compel the attendance of witnesses or for the
production of documentary evidence in the manner provided in K.S.A. 60-245, and K.S.A.
60-245a, and amendments thereto. Subpoenas shall be served in accordance with K.S.A.
61-3001 through 61-3006, and amendments thereto, and shall be accompanied by the
fees for one day's attendance and the mileage allowed by law.
History: L. 2000, ch. 161, § 28; January 1, 2001.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

61-3105.   Depositions. (a) Any party to an action pursuant to the code of civil procedure for
limited actions may take the testimony of any person, including a party, either within or
without the state, by deposition upon oral examination or written questions but only for
use as evidence in the action. Unless the court orders otherwise, the parties may by
written stipulation provide that depositions may be taken before any person, at any
time or place, upon any notice, and in any manner and when so taken may be used like
other depositions. The taking of such depositions shall be governed by the provisions of
K.S.A. 60-228, subsections (b) through (h) of K.S.A. 60-230, 60-231 and subsection (d) of
K.S.A. 60-232, and amendments thereto, except that any party desiring to take a
deposition shall first file with the court, and serve on all other parties to the action, a
motion that the taking of such deposition be allowed due to the existence of at least one
of the conditions prescribed in subsection (b) for the use of depositions as evidence.
Within seven days after any such motion has been made, any other party to the action
may file an objection to such motion, and in such event, the court shall hold a hearing
within seven days thereof to determine the issue. No deposition shall be taken unless
and until the court shall have granted the motion requesting permission therefor.
(b) At the trial, or upon the hearing of a motion or an interlocutory proceeding, any
part or all of a deposition of a witness, whether or not a party, so far as it is admissible
under the rules of evidence, may be used for any purpose against any party who was
present or represented at the taking of the deposition, or who had due notice thereof, if
the court finds that:
(1) The witness is dead;
(2) the witness is outside of the county of the place of trial or hearing, unless it appears
that the absence of the witness was procured by the party offering the deposition;
(3) the witness is unable to attend or testify because of age, sickness, infirmity or
imprisonment;
(4) the party offering the deposition has been unable to procure the attendance of the
witness by subpoena; or
(5) upon application and notice, that such exceptional circumstances exist as to make it
desirable, in the interest of justice and with due regard to the importance of presenting
the testimony of witnesses orally in open court, to allow the deposition to be used.
(c) In addition to the uses of depositions enumerated in subsection (b), the court on
