GH Real Estate approved legal-source text chunk — GH-KS-02_Kansas-Eviction-Fair-Housing-Screening-Safety-Addenda_CURRENT.part-005.txt — verified through 2026-07-12. Official source text controls.

sity Professors, shall be deemed to satisfy the ten-       (1) who are not bona fide executives;
ure requirements of the exemption.                         (2) who are individuals who have little or no
   (e) Any employee who is not assured of a con-        line authority; and
tinuing appointment either by contract, unlimited          (3) whose position and responsibility are such
tenure or another similar arrangement shall not         that they play a significant role in the development
be exempted from the prohibitions against com-          of corporate policy and effectively recommend its
pulsory retirement, even if the employee per-           implementation.
forms functions identical to those performed by            (e) Each employee qualifying for this exemp-
employees with appropriate tenure.                      tion shall have been a bona fide executive or held
   (f) Any employee within the exemption may            a high policy-making position, as those terms are
lawfully be required to retire on account of age at     defined in this regulation, for the two-year period
age 70 or above. In the alternative, the employer       immediately before retirement.
may retain such an employee either in the same             (f) ‘‘Annual retirement benefit’’ means the ag-
position or status or in a different position or        gregate sum payable during each one-year period
status if the employee voluntarily accepts this new     of retirement. The initial one-year period shall
position or status. Any employee who accepts a          commence from the date the benefits first be-
nontenured position or part-time employment             came receivable by the retiree. Once established,
shall not be treated any less favorably, on account     the annual period upon which calculations are
of age, than any similarly situated younger em-         based may not be changed from year to year.
ployee, unless the less favorable treatment is ex-         (g) The annual retirement benefit shall be im-
cused by an exception of the Kansas age discrim-        mediately available to the employee retiring under
ination in employment act. (Authorized by K.S.A.        this exemption. For purposes of determining
1991 Supp. 44-1121; implementing K.S.A. 1991            compliance, ‘‘immediate’’ means that the payment
Supp. 44-1113, 44-1118; effective Dec. 28, 1992.)       of plan benefits, in a lump sum or the first of a
                                                        series of periodic payments, shall occur not later
   21-80-9. Exemption for bona fide exec-               than 60 days after the effective date of the retire-
utive or high policy making employees. (a)              ment in question. The fact that an employee will
The party seeking to invoke the exemption for           receive benefits only after expiration of the 60-day
bona fide executive or high policy-making em-           period shall not preclude retirement under the
ployees shall have the burden of showing that           exemption, if the employee could have elected to
every element of the exemption has been met             receive benefits within that period.
clearly and unmistakably. This exemption shall be          (h) To determine whether the aggregate an-
narrowly construed.                                     nual retirement benefit equals at least $44,000,
   (b) Any employee within the exemption may            only benefits authorized by and provided under
lawfully be required to retire on account of age at     the terms of a pension, profit-sharing, savings, or
age 65 or above. In the alternative, the employer       deferred compensation plan shall be included.
may retain such an employee either in the same             (i)(1) The annual retirement benefit shall be
position or status or in a different position or        nonforfeitable. Accordingly, the exemption shall
status. Any employee who accepts such a new             not be applied to any employee subject to plan
status or position shall not get treated any less fa-   provisions which could cause the cessation of pay-
vorably, on account of age, than any similarly sit-     ments to a retiree or result in the reduction of
uated younger employee.                                 benefits to less than $44,000 in any one year.
   (c) The bona fide executive exemption shall ap-      However, retirement benefits shall not be consid-
ply to top-level employees who exercise substan-        ered forfeitable solely because the benefits are
tial executive authority over a significant number      discontinued or suspended for reasons permitted
of employees and a large volume of business.            under section 411(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue
   Any individual in the corporate organizational       Code.
structure who possesses a comparable or greater            (2) An annual retirement benefit shall not be

                                                    804
                       GUIDELINES ON AGE DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT                       21-80-10

considered forfeitable merely because the mini-         1991 Supp. 44-1113, 44-1118; effective Dec. 28,
mum statutory benefit level is not guaranteed           1992.)
against the possibility of plan bankruptcy or is sub-      21-80-10. Firefighters and law enforce-
ject to benefit restrictions in the event of early      ment officers. The party seeking to invoke the
termination of the plan in accordance with Treas-       exemption for firefighters and law enforcement
ury Regulation 1.401-4(c). However, there shall         officers shall have the burden of showing that
be at least a reasonable expectation that the plan      every element of the exemption has been met
will meet its obligations when the retirement in        clearly and unmistakably. (Authorized by K.S.A.
question becomes effective. (Authorized by              1991 Supp. 44-1121; implementing K.S.A. 1991
K.S.A. 1991 Supp. 44-1121; implementing K.S.A.          Supp. 44-1113; effective Dec. 28, 1992.)




                                                    805
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

31-132a.   Fire safety and prevention; apartment house, defined. Every building or other
structure, together with any building or structure used in connection therewith, kept,
used, maintained, advertised, or held out to the public to be a place where furnished or
unfurnished living accommodations other than sleeping accommodations for transient
guests may be rented as a single room or as a suite of rooms, containing three (3) or
more single units or suites, or both, regardless of the number of tenants therein, and
regardless of whether any such room or suite of rooms is occupied by an owner or
operator of such a building or structure, shall, for the purpose of this act, be deemed an
apartment house.
History: L. 1975, ch. 220, § 2; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

31-133. Fire marshal; power and duties; rules and regulations. (a) The state fire marshal shall
adopt reasonable rules and regulations, consistent with the provisions of this act, for the
safeguarding of life and property from fire, explosion and hazardous materials. Such
rules and regulations shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) The keeping, storage, use, sale, handling, transportation or other disposition of
highly flammable materials, including crude petroleum or any of its products, natural
gas for use in motor vehicles, and of explosives, including gunpowder, dynamite,
fireworks and firecrackers. Any such rules and regulations may prescribe the materials
and construction of receptacles and buildings to be used for any of such purposes;
(2) the transportation of liquid fuel over public highways in order to provide for the
public safety in connection therewith;
(3) the construction, maintenance and regulation of exits and fire escapes from
buildings and all other places in which people work, live or congregate from time to
time for any purpose, including apartment houses, as defined by K.S.A. 31-132a, and
amendments thereto. Such rules and regulations shall not apply to buildings used
wholly as dwelling houses containing no more than two families;
(4) the installation and maintenance of equipment intended for fire control, detection
and extinguishment in all buildings and other places in which persons work, live or
congregate from time to time for any purpose, including apartment houses as defined by
K.S.A. 31-132a, and amendments thereto. Such rules and regulations shall not apply to
buildings used wholly as dwelling houses containing no more than two families;
(5) requiring administrators of public and private schools and educational institutions,
except community colleges, colleges and universities, to conduct at least four fire drills
each school year at some time during school hours, aside from the regular dismissal at
the close of the day's session, and prescribing the manner in which such fire drills are to
be conducted;
(6) procedures for the reporting of fires and explosions occurring within the state and
for the investigation thereof;
(7) procedures for reporting by healthcare providers of treatment of second and third
degree burn wounds involving 20% or more of the victim's body and requiring
hospitalization of the victim, which reporting is hereby authorized notwithstanding any
provision of K.S.A. 60-427, and amendments thereto, to the contrary;
(8) requiring administrators of public and private schools and educational institutions,
except community colleges, colleges and universities, to establish tornado procedures.
Such procedures shall: (A) Provide for at least two tornado drills to be conducted each
school year, of which one shall be conducted in September and one shall be conducted
in March, at some time during school hours, aside from the regular dismissal at the close
of the day's session; (B) describe the manner in which such tornado drills are to be
conducted; and (C) shall be subject to approval by the state fire marshal;
(9) requiring administrators of community colleges, colleges and universities to
establish tornado procedures, which procedures shall be subject to approval by the
director of the disaster agency of the county;
(10) the development and implementation of a statewide system of hazardous
materials assessment and response;
(11) the use of pyrotechnics, pyrotechnic devices and pyrotechnic materials;
(12) requiring administrators of public and private schools and educational
institutions, except community colleges, colleges and universities, to conduct at least
three crisis drills each school year at some time during school hours, aside from the
regular dismissal at the close of the day's session. The manner in which such crisis drills
are conducted may be subject to approval by the safe and secure schools unit of the
Kansas department of education; and
(13) other safeguards, protective measures or means adapted to render inherently safe
from the hazards of fire or the loss of life by fire any building or other place in which
people work, live or congregate from time to time for any purpose, except buildings
used wholly as dwelling houses containing no more than two families.
(b) Any rules and regulations of the state fire marshal adopted pursuant to this section
may incorporate by reference specific editions, or portions thereof, of nationally
recognized fire prevention codes.
(c) The rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall allow facilities in
service prior to the effective date of such rules and regulations, and not in strict
conformity therewith, to continue in service, so long as such facilities are not
determined by the state fire marshal to constitute a distinct hazard to life or property.
Any such determination shall be subject to the appeal provisions contained in K.S.A. 31-
140, and amendments thereto.
(d) The state fire marshal may grant an exemption pursuant to K.S.A. 31-136, and
amendments thereto, that authorizes a variance for the number or manner of drills
conducted pursuant to subsection (a)(5), (8) or (12) for students receiving special
education or related services.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 2; L. 1974, ch. 172, § 1; L. 1975, ch. 219, § 1; L. 1975, ch. 220, §
1; L. 1976, ch. 200, § 1; L. 1982, ch. 168, § 1; L. 1985, ch. 128, § 1; L. 1988, ch. 127, § 1; L.
1999, ch. 65, § 1; L. 2004, ch. 1, § 7; L. 2019, ch. 27, § 1; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

31-134. Adoption of rules and regulations, procedure; distribution; fees; remittance; designated as
fire prevention code; judicial review. (a) Any rules and regulations adopted by the state fire
marshal under this act shall comply with the provisions of K.S.A. 77-415 et seq., and
amendments thereto, except that:
(1) In addition to the method of providing notice of the public hearing prescribed by
K.S.A. 77-421, and amendments thereto, such notice shall be published three times in at
least two newspapers of general circulation, with the last published notice to appear not
less than 15 days prior to the public hearing.
(2) The state fire marshal shall make available for general distribution upon request
copies of any nationally recognized code adopted by reference, marked so as to indicate
the provisions thereof which have been so adopted. The state fire marshal may charge a
fee for the copies in an amount equal to the cost of the copies and their distribution.
Upon collection of any such fees, the state fire marshal shall remit to the state treasurer
such fees in accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. 75-4215, and amendments thereto.
The state treasurer shall deposit the entire amount in the state treasury. The state
treasurer shall credit 10% of each such deposit to the state general fund and shall credit
the remainder of each such deposit to the fire marshal fee fund.
(3) In addition to the filing requirements of K.S.A. 77-416, and amendments thereto, the
state fire marshal shall publish all such rules and regulations and make the same
available for distribution to the general public upon request, but the fire marshal shall
not be required to republish the provisions of any nationally recognized code adopted
by reference if such provisions are made available for general distribution upon request
to the fire marshal's office.
(b) The rules and regulations adopted by the state fire marshal under authority of this
act shall be known and may be cited as the Kansas fire prevention code. Such rules and
regulations shall have uniform force and effect throughout the state. No municipality
shall enact or enforce any ordinance, resolution or rule or regulation inconsistent
therewith, except that nothing in this act shall be construed to impair the power of any
municipality to regulate the use of land by zoning or fire district regulations or to
prohibit or regulate the sale, handling, use or storage of fireworks within its boundaries.
Whenever a question shall arise as to whether another state statute or an enactment of
a municipality is inconsistent with the provisions of the fire prevention code, it shall be
the duty of the state fire marshal to make such determination after a hearing thereon
with all interested parties conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Kansas
administrative procedure act. Any action of the state fire marshal pursuant to this
section is subject to review in accordance with the Kansas judicial review act.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 3; L. 1980, ch. 120, § 3; L. 1983, ch. 130, § 1; L. 1986, ch. 318, §
24; L. 1988, ch. 356, § 67; L. 1992, ch. 220, § 2; L. 2001, ch. 5, § 96; L. 2010, ch. 17, § 44; L.
2011, ch. 53, § 13; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

31-135.   Advisory committees to assist fire marshal; membership; no compensation. Whenever it is
deemed necessary, the state fire marshal may appoint an advisory committee or
committees to assist in the formulation and revision of the state fire prevention code
and in the establishment of standards for certification of members of fire departments
to make arrests, carry firearms and conduct searches and seizures pursuant to K.S.A. 31-
157. Any such advisory committee shall serve without compensation. The membership
of the advisory committee or committees shall be selected on the basis of their
individual expertise and knowledge in the area of fire prevention under consideration.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 4; L. 1982, ch. 135, § 3; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

31-136.   Same; exemptions from regulations, when; procedure. The state fire marshal shall have
the power to grant exemptions from the application of specific requirements of
regulations promulgated pursuant to this act. Any such exemption shall be granted only
upon written request which clearly demonstrates that the enforcement of a specific
requirement of a rule or regulation will cause unnecessary hardship to the petitioner, or
that such exemption is necessary for the petitioner to take advantage of new methods or
equipment of recognized adequacy which conforms to fundamental safety standards.
The particulars of any exemption so granted shall be set forth in writing, and a copy
thereof shall be retained in the office of the state fire marshal.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 5; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

31-137.   Same; enforcement of act and regulations; investigations; entry and examination of buildings
and premises; report, filing. The state fire marshal, deputies of the fire marshal, the chief of
any organized fire department of any municipality, whether such fire department is
regular or volunteer, or any member of any such fire department who has been duly
authorized by the chief thereof, shall enforce the provisions of this act and any rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. Such persons are authorized to make any
investigations deemed necessary of any fire or explosion occurring within this state.
Such persons shall make an investigation of any fire or explosion occurring within this
state, or an attempt to cause any fire or explosion within this state, if there is reason to
believe that the fire was of an incendiary origin or was an attempt to defraud an
insurance company. In addition, the chief of any organized fire department of any
municipality may designate other qualified persons to conduct such investigations in
such municipality. In order to carry out such investigations, the state fire marshal and
those persons designated by or authorized to be designated by this section shall have the
right and authority at all times of day or night to enter upon or examine, in accordance
with existing laws and regulations, any building or premises where any fire or
explosion or attempt to cause a fire or explosion has occurred. Such persons shall make
a written report of the findings of any investigation conducted pursuant to this section
which shall be filed in the office of the state fire marshal.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 6; L. 2004, ch. 26, § 12; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

31-138.   Same; hearings; information and evidence to attorney general or county attorney;
prosecution; assistance by state fire marshal. The state fire marshal or any of the state fire
marshal's deputies, in making the investigations authorized or required in K.S.A. 31-137,
and amendments thereto, may hold a hearing with all interested parties in accordance
with the provisions of subsection (a) of K.S.A. 31-141, and amendments thereto. If the
state fire marshal or any of the state fire marshal's deputies, having made the
investigation, shall be of the opinion that there is probable cause to believe any person
has violated any provision of this act or any of the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant to this act, or that any person is guilty of a criminal conduct under the laws of
this state with respect to any fire or explosion, the state fire marshal shall furnish to the
attorney general or the proper county attorney the names of the witnesses and all of the
information and evidence obtained from the investigation, including a copy of all
pertinent and material testimony taken in the case; and the attorney general or such
county attorney shall take such action as the evidence and testimony justify. The state
fire marshal has the right either in person or by the state fire marshal's deputy to assist
in any prosecution arising therefrom.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 7; L. 1988, ch. 356, § 68; July 1, 1989.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

31-139.   Same; right of entry to determine compliance with law and regulations; complaint; order to
cease and desist. The state fire marshal and those persons designated in K.S.A. 31-137 shall
have the authority during all reasonable hours of operation to enter, in accordance with
existing laws, in and upon all buildings and premises subject to this act for the purpose
of examination, inspection and investigation to determine compliance with the rules
and regulations promulgated under the authority of this act. Whenever the state fire
marshal or any person designated in K.S.A. 31-137 finds any violation of this act or the
act of which this section is amendatory, or of any of the rules or regulations issued
thereunder, or any lawful order issued pursuant thereto, he may file a criminal
complaint with the attorney general or the proper district or county attorney or he may
issue an order to the owner or his agent to cease and desist such violations. Any order so
issued may be appealed by any person aggrieved thereby, as provided in K.S.A. 31-140,
but unless otherwise stated in the order, the filing or pendency of such appeal shall not
abate or operate as a stay of the effect of such order.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 8; L. 1974, ch. 172, § 2; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

31-140.   Same; appeals from orders; notice and hearing; decisions; compliance. Any person
aggrieved by any order or ruling issued pursuant to the provisions of this act may
appeal such order or ruling to the state fire marshal within 15 days from the date of the
service of such order by filing a notice of such appeal in the office of the state fire
marshal. The state fire marshal or a presiding officer from the office of administrative
hearings shall hear such person within 30 days after the receipt of such notice of appeal,
and the hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions of the Kansas
administrative procedure act. The state fire marshal shall file a decision thereon and,
unless by authority of the state fire marshal the order is revoked or modified, the order
shall be complied with within the time fixed in such decision.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 9; L. 1988, ch. 356, § 69; L. 2004, ch. 145, § 11; July 1, 2009.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

31-141.   Same; powers of fire marshal in conduct of hearing; subpoena of witnesses and records;
record of proceedings; statement; failure to comply with subpoena, effect; order by district court;
service of process; costs, taxation. (a) Whenever the state fire marshal or the state fire
marshal's authorized representative is authorized to conduct a hearing under the
provisions of K.S.A. 31-138, and amendments thereto, the state fire marshal shall have
the power to administer oaths, examine and cross-examine witnesses, receive oral and
documentary evidence, and shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, compel their
attendance, and require the production of books, papers, records, correspondence or
other documents which are deemed relevant to the inquiry. The state fire marshal at
such hearing may, and upon the request of any party shall, cause to be made a
stenographic record of all the evidence and all the proceedings had at such hearing. If
no stenographic record is made and if a judicial review is sought, the state fire marshal
shall prepare a statement of the evidence and proceedings for use on review. In case of a
refusal of any person to comply with any subpoena issued hereunder or to testify with
respect to any matter concerning which such person may be lawfully interrogated, the
district court of Shawnee county or the county wherein such party resides, on
application of the state fire marshal, may issue an order requiring such person to
comply with such subpoena and to testify. Any failure to obey any such order of the
court may be punished by the court as a contempt thereof. Nothing contained in this act
shall require the observance at any such hearing of formal rules of pleading or
evidence. Notice of such hearings and any other process caused to be issued by the state
fire marshal shall be served in substantial compliance with the requirements for service
of process in district court.
(b) Whenever any person shall appeal an order or ruling issued pursuant to the
provisions of this act, as provided in K.S.A. 31-140, and amendments thereto, and after a
hearing the decision of the state fire marshal is adverse to such person, the costs of the
hearing, including witness fees, shall be taxed to such person.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 10; L. 1988, ch. 356, § 70; July 1, 1989.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

31-142.   Judicial review of fire marshal's action. Any action of the state fire marshal pursuant
to K.S.A. 31-140, and amendments thereto, is subject to review in accordance with the
Kansas judicial review act.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 11; L. 1977, ch. 105, § 13; L. 1986, ch. 318, § 25; L. 2010, ch.
17, § 45; July 1.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

31-143.   Fire marshal authorized to advise and assist state civil defense director; assistance to
municipalities; responsibilities and duties of state fire marshal. (a) The state fire marshal shall
be authorized to advise, assist and coordinate with the state civil defense director in the
development of civil defense or disaster plans, and on request shall assist any
municipality in the enforcement of the state fire prevention code. He shall have the
responsibility for the implementation of any fire safety programs developed by the state
fire marshal and designed to minimize fire hazards and disasters in loss of life and
property from these causes. Such responsibilities shall include, but are not limited to,
the establishment and enforcement of fire safety practices throughout the state;
preventive inspection and correction activities; coordination of fire safety programs
with volunteer and paid fire companies, other state agencies and municipalities, and the
state fire marshal shall analyze and evaluate Kansas fire loss statistics in order to make
a determination of the problems.
(b) The state fire marshal upon request shall assist the chief of any recognized fire
company or department, any legally designated fire marshal of a municipality and the
personnel of other state agencies in fire prevention matters.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 12; July 1.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

31-144. School buildings; definition; inspection; correction of violations; closing in lieu of repair;
judicial review. (a) As used in this act, "school building" means any building or structure
operated or used for any purpose by, or located upon the land of, any school district,
community college district, area vocational school, area vocational-technical school,
institution under the state board of regents or any private or nonpublic school, college
or university, whether or not operated for profit. The term school building does not
include within its meaning any single-family dwelling or duplex constructed as part of a
vocational education program or construction trades class if such single-family dwelling
or duplex is to be sold, after its construction, for private use.
(b) All school buildings shall be inspected at least once each year. In all cities of the
first and second class in which there is a full-time fire chief or full-time fire inspector,
the inspection of the school buildings shall be conducted by such chief or inspector. The
chief or inspector shall report the findings from the inspection to the state fire marshal
within 30 days after such inspection. In all other cases, school buildings shall be
inspected by the state fire marshal or the fire marshal's authorized assistants.
(c) The state fire marshal shall order the governing body having control of any school
building or facility thereof to correct any condition in such building or facility which is
in violation of this act, or any condition which the fire marshal deems dangerous, or
which in any way prevents a speedy exit from such building. After any such order is
rendered, such governing body shall make the changes required to comply therewith. A
board of education of any school district is hereby authorized to make expenditures
from its general fund or capital outlay fund to comply with such order, or the board
may issue no-fund warrants in such amounts as are necessary to pay expenses incurred
in complying with such order. Such no-fund warrants shall be issued, registered, paid
and redeemed and bear interest as provided by K.S.A. 79-2940, and amendments
thereto, except that the approval of the state board of tax appeals shall not be required.
Such warrants shall recite that they are issued by the board of education of the school
district under authority of this act. Any board of education issuing warrants hereunder
shall make a tax levy at the same time as other tax levies are made, after such warrants
are issued, sufficient to pay such warrants and the interest thereon.
(d) Whenever a board of education receives an order from the state fire marshal
pursuant to subsection (c), the board, in lieu of repairing or remodeling the school
building or facility as ordered by the state fire marshal, may close such building or
facility as an attendance center. Whenever any board of education finds that any such
order of the state fire marshal involves a cost in excess of that which the board of
education finds the school district can afford, or that the changes ordered are
unwarranted or unnecessary, the board may petition for review of such order in the
district court of the home county of such school district. Upon receiving such petition,
the district court shall appoint three disinterested commissioners, one of whom shall be
a licensed architect. The commissioners shall inspect the building or facility affected by
the order and report to the court its findings of fact as to the necessity for the
improvements or changes ordered by the state fire marshal, together with the estimated
cost of each such improvement or change and such other recommendations as the
commissioners deem advisable. Upon receiving such findings of fact and
recommendations, or any other evidence relating to the petition for review, the court
shall enter its order affirming, reversing or modifying the order of the state fire
marshal. Such order of the court may be reviewed by the appellate courts in the same
manner as other orders and judgments of the district court may be reviewed.
(e) Except as provided in subsection (d), any action of the state fire marshal pursuant
to this section is subject to review in accordance with the Kansas judicial review act.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 13; L. 1986, ch. 318, § 26; L. 1988, ch. 128, § 1; L. 1991, ch. 230,
§ 2; L. 1992, ch. 280, § 52; L. 2008, ch. 109, § 57; L. 2010, ch. 17, § 46; L. 2014, ch. 141, § 51;
July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

31-145.   Powers of actual members of organized fire departments. Actual members of any
organized fire department, whether regular or volunteer, of any municipality shall be
vested with police power to form fire lines, to prohibit persons from interfering with
firefighters in the discharge of their duties, interfering with apparatus, running over fire
hose and trespassing upon private property, and shall have power to blockade any
public highway temporarily while in the discharge of their official duties; and for the
purpose of effectuating this police power shall have the power to make arrests for
violation of any lawful orders made hereunder.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 14; L. 2009, ch. 42, § 1; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

31-146.   Mandatory provisions of regulations governing transportation of liquid fuels; how
inspections performed. The rules and regulations promulgated by the state fire marshal for
transporting liquid fuel shall require that the vehicles used in such transportation be
inspected by qualified inspectors sufficiently often to insure operation with maximum
safety, and the operator of any such vehicle which is subject to the jurisdiction of the
state corporation commission shall file with the commission copies of all such
inspector's clearance receipts for such vehicles. The inspections required herein shall be
performed by inspectors in the state fire marshal's office, except that the state fire
marshal may issue a private inspector's permit to any person having registered in his
name in this state one (1) or more vehicles used for transporting liquid fuel, if such
person maintains inspection facilities and personnel qualified to perform the inspection
to the satisfaction of the state fire marshal's office.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 15; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

31-147.   Compliance with regulations by hotels, lodging facilities and restaurants. Hotels, motels,
rooming houses, apartment houses, adult care homes, child care facilities, hospitals,
adult boarding homes and restaurants shall comply with the rules and regulations
promulgated by the state fire marshal for such occupancies.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 16; July 1.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

31-148.   Inspection of building under jurisdiction of state penal director and division of institutional
management. The state fire marshal at least annually shall inspect all buildings under the
jurisdiction of the state penal director and the division of institutional management of
the department of social welfare.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 17; July 1.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

31-150.   Fire safety and prevention; school buildings; construction, reconstruction or renovation
requirements; accessibility to persons with a disability; building plans, certification; exceptions; rules
and regulations. (a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the construction,
reconstruction or renovation of school buildings shall comply with the requirements of
the 2000 edition of the international building code as published by the international
codes council. All electric wiring shall conform to requirements of the 1999 issue of the
national electric code of the national fire protection association.
(b) The construction, reconstruction or renovation of mobile, modular, portable or
relocatable school buildings shall conform to the requirements of the 2000 edition of the
life safety code as published by the national fire protection association.
(c) The construction, reconstruction or renovation of all school buildings shall conform
to the provisions for making buildings and facilities accessible to, and usable by, persons
with a disability, as required by K.S.A. 58-1301 through 58-1311, and amendments
thereto.
(d) No contract shall be let for the construction, reconstruction or renovation of any
school building, and it shall be illegal to pay out any public funds for the construction,
reconstruction or renovation of a school building unless the plans for such building bear
the seal of an architect or a professional engineer licensed by the state board of
technical professions of the state of Kansas certifying that the plans meet the applicable
requirements of this act.
(e) The provisions of subsections (c) and (d) shall not apply to any building or structure
operated or used for any purpose by, or located upon the land of any community
college, technical college, municipal university, institution under the governance of the
state board of regents or other institutions of post secondary education as defined by
K.S.A. 74-3249, and amendments thereto. Prior to construction, reconstruction or
renovation of a building or structure, all community colleges, technical colleges, any
municipal university, institutions under the governance of the state board of regents or
other institutions of post secondary education as defined by K.S.A. 74-3249, and
amendments thereto, shall submit to the state fire marshal a code footprint for
evaluation and approval of the fire/life safety features of such building or structure.
(f) The relocation of school buildings to which the provisions of subsection (b) apply
shall not be construed to be construction or reconstruction under the provisions of this
section.
(g) The state fire marshal shall adopt rules and regulations specifying those subsequent
editions of the codes enumerated in subsections (a) and (b) which the state fire marshal
has determined provide protection equivalent to those editions specified herein.
Compliance with any subsequent edition specified by such rules and regulations shall be
considered compliance with the edition of the code specified by this section.
History: L. 1972, ch. 157, § 19; L. 1978, ch. 150, § 1; L. 1978, ch. 336, § 1; L. 1979, ch. 115,
§ 1; L. 1981, ch. 343, § 2; L. 1984, ch. 149, § 1; L. 1986, ch. 147, § 1; L. 1992, ch. 208, § 4; L.
2001, ch. 23, § 1; L. 2004, ch. 166, § 3; L. 2010, ch. 149, § 2; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

31-157. Fire marshal deputies and investigatory personnel; law enforcement powers, when; training
required, exceptions. (a) The state fire marshal, the state fire marshal's deputies and full-
time fire prevention personnel assigned investigation duties who are members of a paid
fire department who have been certified by the state fire marshal pursuant to this
section shall have the authority to make arrests, carry firearms and conduct searches
and seizures while investigating any fire or explosion in which arson or attempted
arson is suspected or in which there is an attempt or suspected attempt to defraud an
insurance company. Any affidavits necessary to authorize arrests, searches or seizures
pursuant to this section shall be made in accordance with K.S.A. 22-2302 and 22-2502,
and amendments thereto.
(b) The state fire marshal, with the assistance of an advisory committee appointed
pursuant to K.S.A. 31-135, and amendments thereto, shall adopt rules and regulations
and specify the number of investigators for departments or areas and establish
standards for certification of members of fire departments to make arrests, carry
firearms and conduct searches and seizures pursuant to this section. No fire department
personnel shall be certified to carry firearms under the provisions of this act without
having first successfully completed the firearm training course or courses prescribed for
law enforcement officers under K.S.A. 74-5604a, and amendments thereto.
(c) With the exception of firearms training, nothing in this section shall be construed to
require persons employed prior to the effective date of this act to comply with the
standards established by the state fire marshal pursuant to this section as a condition of
continued employment, and such persons' failure to comply with such standards shall
not make such persons ineligible for any promotional examination for which they are
otherwise eligible or affect in any way any pension rights to which they are entitled on
the effective date of this act.
History: L. 1982, ch. 135, § 1; L. 2012, ch. 89, § 12; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

31-158.   Fire safety and prevention; sale to or purchase by fire department of clothing or equipment
which does not meet standards set by national fire protection association; penalty; definition. (a) No
person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale in this state to any fire department any item
of clothing or equipment intended to protect firefighters from death or injury while
fighting fires unless the item of clothing or equipment meets or exceeds the minimum
standards established for such item of clothing or equipment by the national fire
protection association, in effect on the effective date of this act.
(b) No fire department shall purchase in this state any item of clothing or equipment
intended to protect firefighters from death or injury while fighting fires unless the item
of clothing or equipment meets or exceeds the minimum standards established for such
item of clothing or equipment by the national fire protection association, in effect on the
effective date of this act.
(c) A violation of subsection (a) is a class B misdemeanor.
(d) As used in this section, "fire department" means any city, county, township or other
public or private fire department.
History: L. 1988, ch. 126, § 1; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

31-159.   Violations of fire prevention code, administrative penalties. (a) In addition to any other
penalty provided by law, the state fire marshal, upon finding that any person has
violated the provisions of the Kansas fire prevention code, may impose a penalty not to
exceed $1,000, which shall constitute an actual and substantial economic deterrent to
the violation for which the penalty is assessed.
(b) No penalty shall be imposed pursuant to this section except upon the written order
of the state fire marshal to the person who committed the violation. The order shall state
the violation, the penalty imposed and the right to appeal to the state fire marshal. Any
such person, within 30 days after service of such order, may make written request to the
fire marshal for a hearing thereon. The fire marshal shall conduct a hearing in
accordance with the provisions of the Kansas administrative procedure act within 30
days after receipt of such request.
(c) Any person aggrieved by any order issued pursuant to this section may appeal such
order in accordance with the provisions of the Kansas judicial review act.
(d) All moneys received from penalties imposed pursuant to this section shall be
remitted to the state treasurer in accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. 75-4215, and
amendments thereto. Upon receipt of each such remittance, the state treasurer shall
deposit the entire amount in the state treasury to the credit of the state general fund.
(e) If a fire safety inspection is required to meet licensing requirements of a state
agency, the state fire marshal, before imposing a penalty pursuant to this section, shall
make written request to the state licensing agency to take appropriate action to require
compliance with the Kansas fire prevention code. If the state licensing agency fails to
take such action within 60 days after receipt of the state fire marshal's notice, the state
fire marshal may impose a penalty as provided by this section.
History: L. 1993, ch. 65, § 1; L. 2001, ch. 5, § 97; L. 2010, ch. 17, § 47; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

31-160.   Smoke detectors; citation of act. K.S.A. 31-160 through 31-164 shall be known and
may be cited as the smoke detector act.
History: L. 1998, ch. 66, § 12; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

31-161.   Same; definitions. When used in this act:
(a) "Dwelling unit" means a single-family residence, multiple-family residence and
each living unit in a mixed-use building.
(b) "Smoke detector" means a device or combination of devices which operate from a
power supply in the dwelling unit or at the point of installation for the purpose of
detecting visible or invisible particles of combustion. Such term shall include smoke
detectors approved or listed for the purpose for which they are intended by an
approved independent testing laboratory.
History: L. 1998, ch. 66, § 13; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

31-162.   Same; installation of smoke detectors required; limitations on enforcement; certain evidence
inadmissible; insurance payments not affected. (a) Every single-family residence shall have at
least one smoke detector on every story of the dwelling unit.
(b) Every structure which:
(1) Contains more than one dwelling unit; or
(2) contains at least one dwelling unit and is a mixed-use structure, shall contain at
least one smoke detector at the uppermost ceiling of each interior stairwell and on every
story in each dwelling unit.
(c) The owner of a structure shall supply and install all required smoke detectors. The
owner of a structure shall test and maintain all smoke detectors, except inside rental
units, the occupant shall test and maintain all smoke detectors after taking possession of
the dwelling unit.
(d) The smoke detectors required in dwelling units in existence on January 1, 1999,
may either be battery-powered or wired into the structure's electrical system, and need
not be interconnected. The smoke detectors required in dwelling units constructed after
January 1, 1999, shall be wired permanently into the structure's electrical system.
(e) For purposes of this act, manufactured homes as defined in K.S.A. 58-4202, and
amendments thereto, shall be subject to the federal, manufactured home construction
and safety standards established pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 5403 in lieu of the standards set
forth herein. Owners and occupants of such manufactured homes shall be subject to the
testing and maintenance standards for smoke detectors required under this act.
(f) Officials responsible for the enforcement of the smoke detector act shall not enter a
dwelling unit solely for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of
the smoke detector act except when:
(1) Conducting an inspection prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit or building
permit;
(2) responding to a report of a fire in a dwelling unit, except in cases of a false alarm;
or
(3) conducting, at the request of the owner or occupant, a home safety inspection.
(g) Evidence of the failure of any property owner to provide an operational smoke
detector in a residence as required by this section shall not be admissible in any action
for the purpose of determining any aspect of civil liability.
Evidence of the failure of any occupant to properly maintain a smoke detector as
required by this section shall not be admissible in any action for the purpose of
determining any aspect of civil liability.
(h) The provisions of the smoke detector act shall not constitute grounds for the
purpose of offsetting, reducing or denying the payment of amounts due under any
contract for or policy of insurance.
History: L. 1998, ch. 66, § 14; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

31-163.   Same; violations; penalties. Failure to place or maintain a smoke detector as
provided by the smoke detector act shall be a nonclass nonperson misdemeanor. Any
fine imposed for a violation of this section shall not exceed $25.
History: L. 1998, ch. 66, § 15; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

31-164.   Same; act in addition to local law. This law shall be in addition to any county
resolution or city ordinance relating to regulation of smoke detectors.
History: L. 1998, ch. 66, § 16; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

65-1,200.   Citation of act. K.S.A. 65-1,200 to 65-1,214, inclusive, of this act shall be known
and may be cited as the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act.
History: L. 1999, ch. 99, § 2; April 22.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

65-1,201.   Definitions. As used in the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act:
(a) "Abatement" means any measure or set of measures designed to permanently
eliminate lead-based paint hazards as defined in the federal program.
(b) "Accredited training program" means a training program that has been accredited
by the federal program or the secretary to present training courses to individuals
engaged in lead-based paint activities.
(c) "Business entity" means a company, partnership, corporation, sole proprietorship,
association, or other business concern.
(d) "Certificate" means an authorization issued by the secretary permitting an
individual to engage in lead-based paint activities.
(e) "Federal program" means subpart L, lead-based paint activities of 40 C.F.R. part 745,
as in effect on the effective date of this act.
(f) "Lead-based paint" means paint or other surface coatings that contain lead equal to
or in excess of one milligram per square centimeter or more than 0.5% by weight.
(g) "Lead-based paint activities" means the inspection, assessment and abatement of
lead-based paint, including the disposal of waste generated therefrom.
(h) "License" means an authorization issued by the secretary permitting a business
entity to engage in lead-based paint activities.
(i) "Public agency" means any state agency or political or taxing subdivision of the state
and those federal departments, agencies or instrumentalities thereof which are not
subject to preemption.
(j) "Secretary" means the secretary of health and environment.
(k) "Residential dwelling" means a detached single family dwelling or a single family
dwelling unit in a structure that contains more than one separate residential dwelling
unit used as a place of residence for habitation by an individual or the individual's
immediate family, or both.
(l) "Habitation" means a place of abode or residence constructed before 1978 where
individuals eat, sleep and reside.
(m) "Immediate family" means spouse, parent, stepparent, child, stepchild or sibling.
History: L. 1999, ch. 99, § 3; April 22.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

65-1,202.   Development and implementation of prevention program; licensure training and
inspections; fees; rules and regulations. The secretary shall administer the provisions of the
residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act. In administering the provisions of
the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act, the secretary shall be
authorized to:
(a) Develop and implement a childhood lead poisoning prevention program as
necessary to protect the health of the children of Kansas, which may include provisions
to:
(1) Investigate the extent of childhood lead poisoning in Kansas;
(2) develop a data management system designed to collect and analyze information on
childhood lead poisoning;
(3) develop and conduct programs to educate health care providers regarding the
magnitude and severity of and the necessary responses to lead poisoning in Kansas;
(4) issue recommendations for the methods and intervals for blood lead screening and
testing of children, taking into account recommendations by the United States centers
for disease control and prevention, except that no child shall be screened or tested if the
child's parent or guardian objects in writing on the ground that such screening or
testing is contrary to the parent's or guardian's religious beliefs and practices;
(5) develop and issue health advisories urging health care providers to conduct blood
lead screening of children;
(6) encourage health care providers to ensure that parents and guardians of children
are advised of the availability and advisability of screening and testing for lead
poisoning;
(7) develop a program to assist local health departments in identification and follow-
up of cases of elevated blood lead levels in children and other high-risk individuals; and
(8) in consultation with appropriate federal, state and local agencies, develop a
comprehensive public education program regarding environmental lead exposures and
lead poisoning by:
(A) Identifying appropriate target groups that are in a position to prevent lead
poisoning or reduce the number of children who are exposed to lead;
(B) assessing the information needed for each of the target groups and determine the
best means of educating the members of each target groups; and
(C) disseminating the information to the target groups in an effective manner.
(b) adopt rules and regulations necessary for the administration of the residential
childhood lead poisoning prevention act including, but not limited to, licensure of
business entities and public agencies, certification of individuals, accreditation of
training programs, on-site inspections and requirements, notification and record
keeping, procedures and work practice standards relating to lead-based paint activities
as are necessary to protect the public health and safety;
(c) adopt by rules and regulations a reasonable schedule of fees for the issuance and
renewal of certificates and licenses, training program accreditations and on-site
inspections. The fees shall be periodically increased or decreased consistent with the
need to cover the direct and indirect costs to administer the program. At no time shall
such fees exceed those charged by the United States environmental protection agency
for the same or similar regulatory programs. The fees shall be based upon the amount of
revenue determined by the secretary to be required for proper administration of the
provisions of the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act. State and local
health department personnel certifying for the purpose of environmental investigation
of lead poisoned children shall be exempted from licensure fees;
(d) conduct on-site inspections of procedures being utilized by a licensee during an
actual abatement project and conduct inspection of the records pertaining to the
residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act;
(e) adopt rules and regulations regarding the distribution of lead hazard information
to owners and occupants of housing prior to conducting renovation activities in
housing;
(f) develop rules and regulations to control and disposition and reuse of architectural
debris that contains lead-based paint.
History: L. 1999, ch. 99, § 4; April 22.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

65-1,203.   Licensure or certification to perform lead-based paint activities. (a) A business entity or
public agency shall not engage in a lead-based paint activity unless the business entity
or public agency holds a license issued by the secretary for that purpose.
(b) Except as otherwise provided in the residential childhood lead poisoning
prevention act, no individual shall engage in lead-based paint activities unless the
individual holds a certificate issued by the secretary for that purpose. In order to qualify
for a certificate, an individual must have successfully completed an accredited training
program and pass a third party exam as required by the secretary. Any individual who
owns and resides in a residential dwelling may perform lead-based paint activities
within such residential dwelling even though such individual does not hold a certificate
for that purpose under the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act. All work
performed by such individual owner of a residential dwelling must be performed in
accordance with state and federal guidelines or statutes, or both.
(c) Any business or public agency that owns or leases a nonresidential dwelling may
perform lead-based paint activities within such facility even though such business or
public agency does not hold a license for that purpose under the residential childhood
lead poisoning prevention act. All work performed by a business or public agency on
such facility must be performed in accordance with state and federal guidelines or
statutes, or both.
History: L. 1999, ch. 99, § 5; April 22.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

65-1,204.   Same; qualification requirements. In order to qualify for a license, a business entity
or public agency shall:
(a) Ensure that each employee or agent of the business entity or public agency who
will engage in a lead-based paint activity is certified;
(b) demonstrate to the satisfaction of the secretary that the business entity or public
agency is capable of complying with all requirements, procedures and standards of the
United States environmental protection agency, the United States occupational safety
and health administration and the secretary, as applicable, to lead-based paint activities;
(c) comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the secretary under the
residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act; and
(d) allow representatives of the secretary, after identification, to enter and inspect any
habitation or property on which a habitation is situated at any reasonable time with
consent of the owner or under search warrant for the purpose of inspecting lead-based
paint activities as required in order to implement provisions of the residential childhood
lead poisoning prevention act.
History: L. 1999, ch. 99, § 6; April 22.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

65-1,205.   Remittance of fees. The secretary shall remit all moneys received from the fees
established pursuant to the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act to the
state treasurer in accordance with the provisions of K.S.A. 75-4215, and amendments
thereto. Upon receipt of each such remittance, the state treasurer shall deposit the entire
amount in the state treasury to the credit of the lead-based paint hazard fee fund
established in K.S.A. 65-1,206, and amendments thereto.
History: L. 1999, ch. 99, § 7; L. 2001, ch. 5, § 215; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

65-1,206.   Lead-based paint hazard fee fund; sources of revenue; expenditures. (a) There is
established in the state treasury the lead-based paint hazard fee fund. Revenue from the
following sources shall be deposited in the state treasury and credited to the fund:
(1) Fees collected under the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act for
licensure and certification to engage in lead-based paint activities, accreditation of
training programs and fees for evaluation of abatement projects;
(2) any moneys recovered by the state under the residential childhood lead poisoning
prevention act, including administrative expenses, civil penalties and moneys paid
under any agreement, stipulation or settlement;
(3) any moneys collected or received from public or private grants and from gifts and
donations; and
(4) interest attributable to investment of moneys in the fund.
(b) Moneys deposited in the fund shall be expended only for the purpose of
administering the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act and for no other
governmental purposes.
(c) On or before the 10th day of each month, the director of accounts and reports shall
transfer from the state general fund to the lead-based paint hazard fee fund interest
earnings based on:
(1) The average daily balance of moneys in the lead-based paint hazard fee fund for
the preceding month; and
(2) the net earnings rate of the pooled money investment portfolio for the preceding
month.
(d) All expenditures from the fund shall be made in accordance with appropriation
acts upon warrants of the director of accounts and reports issued pursuant to vouchers
approved by the secretary for the purposes set forth in this section.
History: L. 1999, ch. 99, § 8; April 22.
                                      2025 Kansas Statutes

65-1,207.   Denial, suspension or revocation of license or certificate or accreditation of training
program, when; suspension of abatement program; administrative review. (a) The secretary may
refuse to issue a license or may suspend or revoke any license issued under the
residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act if the secretary finds, after notice
and hearing conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Kansas administrative
procedure act, that the applicant or licensee has:
(1) Fraudulently or deceptively obtained or attempted to obtain a license;
(2) failed at any time to meet the qualifications for a license or to comply with any
rules and regulations adopted by the secretary under the residential childhood lead
poisoning prevention act;
(3) failed at any time to meet any applicable federal or state standard for lead-based
paint activities; or
(4) employed or permitted an uncertified individual to work on a lead-based paint
activity.
(b) The secretary may refuse to issue a certificate or may suspend or revoke any
certificate issued under the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act if the
secretary finds, after notice and hearing conducted in accordance with the provisions of
the Kansas administrative procedure act, that the applicant for certificate or certificate
holder has:
(1) Fraudulently or deceptively obtained or attempted to obtain a certificate; or
(2) failed at any time to meet qualifications for a certificate or to comply with any
provision or requirement of the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act or
any rules and regulations adopted by the secretary under the residential childhood lead
poisoning prevention act.
(c) The secretary may deny, suspend or revoke any accreditation of a training program
under the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act if the secretary finds,
after notice and hearing conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Kansas
administrative procedure act, that the applicant for training program accreditation or
training provider has:
(1) Fraudulently or deceptively obtained or attempted to obtain accreditation of a
training program;
(2) failed at any time to meet the qualifications to obtain accreditation of a training
program or to comply with any rules and regulations adopted by the secretary under
the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act;
(3) failed to maintain or provide information on training programs; or
(4) falsified information, accreditation or approval records, instructor qualification
information or other accreditation or approval information required to be submitted by
the secretary.
(d) Any individual, business entity or accredited training program aggrieved by a
decision or order of the secretary may appeal the order or decision in accordance with
the provisions of the Kansas judicial review act.
(e) (1) If the secretary finds that the public health or safety is endangered by the
continuation of an abatement project, the secretary may temporarily suspend, without
notice or hearing in accordance with the emergency adjudication procedures of the
provisions of the Kansas administrative procedure act, the license of the business entity
or public agency or the certificate of any person engaging in such abatement project.
(2) In no case shall a temporary suspension of a license or certificate under this section
be in effect for a period of time in excess of 90 days. At the end of such period of time,
the license or certificate shall be reinstated unless the secretary has suspended or
revoked the license or certificate, after notice and hearing in accordance with the
provisions of the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act, or the license has
expired as otherwise provided under the residential childhood lead poisoning
prevention act.
History: L. 1999, ch. 99, § 9; L. 2010, ch. 17, § 115; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

65-1,208.   Noncompliance; notice; duty to meet compliance requirements. Whenever an
authorized agency of the secretary finds that any individual, business entity, accredited
program or public agency is not in compliance with the residential childhood lead
poisoning prevention act or any rules and regulations adopted under the residential
childhood lead poisoning prevention act, it shall be the duty of such agent to notify the
individual, business entity, accredited program or public agency in writing of such
changes or alterations as the agency shall deem necessary in order to comply with the
requirements of the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act and any rules
and regulations adopted under the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act,
and the agency shall file a copy of such notice with the secretary. It shall thereupon be
the duty of the individual, business entity, accredited program or public agency to make
such changes or alterations as are contained in the written notice within five days from
the receipt of such notice.
History: L. 1999, ch. 99, § 10; April 22.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

65-1,209.   Violations; criminal penalties. Any individual, business entity, public agency or
accredited training program which knowingly violates any provision of the residential
childhood lead poisoning prevention act or any rules and regulations adopted under the
residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act is guilty:
(a) For a first offense, of a class C misdemeanor; and
(b) for a second offense or subsequent offense, of a class B misdemeanor.
History: L. 1999, ch. 99, § 11; April 22.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

65-1,210.   Same; civil penalties; corrective action; appeals; grants to communities to eliminate
hazards. (a) Any individual, business entity, accredited training program or public
agency who violates any provision of the residential childhood lead poisoning
prevention act or any rules and regulations adopted under the residential childhood
lead poisoning prevention act, in addition to any other penalty or litigation provided by
law, may incur a civil penalty imposed under subsection (b) in a maximum amount not
to exceed $1,000 for the first violation, $5,000 for each subsequent violation and, in the
case of a continuing violation, every day such previously notified violation continues
shall be deemed a separate violation.
(b) The secretary, upon finding that any individual, business entity, accredited training
program or public agency has violated any provision of the residential childhood lead
poisoning prevention act or any rules and regulations adopted under the residential
childhood lead poisoning prevention act, may impose a civil penalty within the limits
provided in this section upon such individual, business entity, accredited training
program or public agency which civil penalty shall be in an amount to constitute an
actual and substantial economic deterrent to the violation for which the civil penalty is
assessed.
(c) The secretary, upon finding that an individual, business entity, accredited training
program or public agency has violated any provision of the residential childhood lead
poisoning prevention act or rules and regulations adopted under the residential
childhood lead poisoning prevention act, may issue an order finding such individual,
business entity, accredited training program or public agency in violation of the
residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act and directing the individual,
business entity, accredited training program or public agency to take such action as
necessary to correct the violation.
(d) No civil penalty shall be imposed under this section except upon the written order
of the secretary after notification and hearing, if a hearing is requested, in accordance
with the provisions of the Kansas administrative procedure act.
(e) Any individual, business entity, accredited training program or public agency
aggrieved by an order of the secretary made under this section may appeal such order
to the district court in the manner provided by the Kansas judicial review act.
(f) Any penalty recovered pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be remitted to
the state treasurer and deposited in the lead-based paint hazard fee fund.
(g) The secretary shall use penalties recovered pursuant to the provisions of this
section to establish a grant program for communities to conduct activities designed to
reduce or eliminate exposure of children to residential lead-based paint hazards.
History: L. 1999, ch. 99, § 12; L. 2010, ch. 17, § 116; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

65-1,211.   Same; additional remedies. Notwithstanding any other remedy and in addition to
any other remedy, the secretary may maintain, in the manner provided by the Kansas
judicial review act, an action in the name of the state of Kansas for injunction or other
process against any business entity or individual to restrain or prevent any violation of
the provisions of the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act or of any rules
and regulations adopted under the residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act.
History: L. 1999, ch. 99, § 13; L. 2010, ch. 17, § 117; July 1.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

65-1,212.   Implementation of act by entities engaging in lead-based paint activities; when. Licensure,
certification or training program accreditation for a business entity, public agency or
individual who engages in lead-based paint activities shall not be required until such
time as the secretary adopts rules and regulations to implement the provisions of the
residential childhood lead poisoning prevention act.
History: L. 1999, ch. 99, § 14; April 22.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

65-1,213.   Statutory audit privilege not applicable. The audit privilege recognized in K.S.A. 60-
3332 through 60-3339 does not pertain to the residential childhood lead poisoning
prevention act.
History: L. 1999, ch. 99, § 15; April 22.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

58-3037.   Exemptions. The provisions of this act shall not apply to:
(a) Any person, other than a person licensed under this act, who directly performs any
of the acts within the scope of this act with reference to such person's own property.
(b) Any person who directly performs any of the acts within the scope of this act with
reference to property that such person is authorized to transfer in any way by a power
of attorney from the owner, provided that such person receives no commission or other
compensation, direct or indirect, for performing any such act.
(c) Services rendered by an attorney licensed to practice in this state in performing
such attorney's professional duties as an attorney.
(d) Any person acting as receiver, trustee in bankruptcy, administrator, executor or
guardian, or while acting under a court order or under the authority of a will or a trust
instrument or as a witness in any judicial proceeding or other proceeding conducted by
the state or any governmental subdivision or agency.
(e) Any officer or employee of the federal or state government, or any political
subdivision or agency thereof, when performing the official duties of the officer or
employee.
(f) Any multiple listing service wholly owned by a nonprofit organization or
association of brokers.
(g) Any nonprofit referral system or organization of brokers formed for the purpose of
referral of prospects for the sale or listing of real estate.
(h) Railroads or other public utilities regulated by the state of Kansas, or their
subsidiaries, affiliated corporations, officers or regular employees, unless performance
of any of the acts described in subsection (f) of K.S.A. 58-3035, and amendments thereto,
is in connection with the sale, purchase, lease or other disposition of real estate or
investment therein unrelated to the principal business activity of such railroad or other
public utility or affiliated or subsidiary corporation thereof.
(i) The sale or lease of real estate by an employee of a person, association, corporation,
limited liability company, limited liability partnership, partnership or professional
corporation which owns or leases such real estate, if such employee owns 5% or greater
interest in such association, limited liability company, limited liability partnership,
partnership or professional corporation or of the stock of such corporation.
(j) The sale or lease of new homes by a person, association, corporation, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership or professional corporation who
constructed such homes, but the provisions of this act shall apply to the sale or lease of
any such homes by any employee of such person, association, corporation, limited
liability company, limited liability partnership, partnership or professional corporation
if such employee owns less than 5% interest in such association, limited liability
company, limited liability partnership, partnership or professional corporation or by
any employee of a corporation who owns less than 5% of the stock of such corporation.
(k) The lease of real estate for agricultural purposes.
History: L. 1980, ch. 164, § 4; L. 1986, ch. 209, § 16; L. 1989, ch. 167, § 3; L. 1991, ch. 163,
§ 1; L. 1995, ch. 252, § 16; L. 1996, ch. 212, § 4; L. 1997, ch. 65, § 6; L. 2002, ch. 82, § 2; L.
2010, ch. 104, § 2; July 1.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

16-201. Legal rate of interest; prejudgment interest rate in civil tort actions. (a) Except as
provided in subsection (b), creditors shall be allowed to receive interest at the rate of
10% per annum when no other rate of interest is agreed upon, for any money after it
becomes due; for money lent or money due on settlement of account, from the day of
liquidating the account and ascertaining the balance; for money received for the use of
another and retained without the owner's knowledge of the receipt; for money due and
withheld by an unreasonable and vexatious delay of payment or settlement of accounts;
for all other money due and to become due for the forbearance of payment whereof an
express promise to pay interest has been made; and for money due from corporations
and individuals to their daily or monthly employees, from and after the end of each
month, unless paid within 15 days thereafter.
(b) In all civil tort actions filed on or after July 1, 2023, under chapter 60 of the Kansas
Statutes Annotated, and amendments thereto, in which the court determines that
prejudgment interest shall be awarded, the judgment creditor shall be allowed to
receive interest at the rate per annum of two percentage points below the rate per
annum specified in K.S.A. 16-204(e)(1), and amendments thereto.
History: L. 1889, ch. 164, § 1; L. 1980, ch. 74, § 1; L. 2023, ch. 55, § 1; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

60-2610. Civil liability for worthless check. (a) If a person gives a worthless check, the person
shall be liable to the holder of the check for the amount of the check, the incurred court
costs, the incurred service charge, interest at the statutory rate and the costs of
collection including but not limited to reasonable attorney fees, plus an amount equal to
the greater of the following:
(1) Damages equal to three times the amount of the check but not exceeding the
amount of the check by more than $500; or
(2) $100.
The court may waive all or part of the attorney fees provided for by this subsection, if
the court finds that the damages and other amounts awarded are sufficient to
adequately compensate the holder of the check. In the event the court waives all or part
of the attorney fees, the court shall make written findings of fact as to the specific
reasons that the amounts awarded are sufficient to adequately compensate the holder of
the check.
(b) The amounts specified by subsection (a) shall be recoverable in a civil action
brought by or on behalf of the holder of the check only if: (1) Not less than 14 days
before filing the civil action, the holder of the check made written demand on the maker
or drawer for payment of the amount of the check, the incurred service charge and
accrued interest; and (2) the maker or drawer failed to tender to the holder, prior to the
filing of the action, an amount not less than the amount demanded.
The written demand shall be sent by first class mail, to the person to be given notice at
such person's address as it appears on such check, draft or order or to the last known
address of the maker or drawer. The written demand shall include notice that, if the
money is not paid within 14 days, triple damages in addition to an amount of money
equal to the sum of the amount of the check, the incurred service charge, court costs,
accrued interest, the costs of collection, including but not limited to, reasonable attorney
fees unless the court otherwise orders, may be incurred by the maker or drawer of the
check.
Notice required by subsection (b)(1) shall state the exact amount and date due, as well as
an estimate of the amount that may be incurred if the amount demanded is not paid by
the specified date.
(c) Subsequent to the filing of an action under this section but prior to the
commencement of a dispositional hearing by the court, the defendant may tender to the
plaintiff as satisfaction of the claim, an amount of money equal to the sum of the
amount of the check, the incurred service charge, accrued interest, the costs of
collection including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney fees and court costs. The
plaintiff shall include in the petition a statement alleging that the defendant may tender
such amount as satisfaction of the claim as provided in this subsection. If the amount
alleged in the petition is tendered to the plaintiff in full satisfaction of the debt prior to
the commencement of the dispositional hearing by the court, the case shall be dismissed
by the plaintiff. For purposes of this subsection only, the amount tendered as
satisfaction of the claim shall not include triple damages or damages of $100 as provided
in subsections (a)(1) and (2). For purposes of this subsection, a dispositional hearing
means a trial or other hearing by the court in which the plaintiff is seeking the entry of
judgment against the defendant. The court may waive all or part of the attorney fees
provided for by this subsection, if the court finds that the amount tendered is sufficient
to adequately compensate the holder of the check. In the event the court waives all or
part of the attorney fees, the court shall make written findings of fact as to the specific
reasons that the amount tendered is sufficient to adequately compensate the holder of
the check.
(d) If the trier of fact determines that the failure of the defendant to satisfy the
dishonored check was due to economic hardship, the court may waive all or part of the
damages provided for by this section, but the court shall render judgment against
defendant for not less than the amount of the dishonored check, the incurred court
costs, service charge and the costs of collection, including but not limited to reasonable
attorney fees, unless otherwise provided in this subsection. The court may waive all or
part of the attorney fees provided for by this subsection, if the court finds that the
damages and other amounts awarded are sufficient to adequately compensate the
holder of the check. In the event the court waives all or part of the attorney fees, the
court shall make written findings of fact as to the specific reasons that the amounts
awarded are sufficient to adequately compensate the holder of the check.
(e) Any amount previously paid as restitution or reparations to the holder of the check
by or on behalf of its maker or drawer shall be credited against the amount for which
the maker or drawer is liable under subsection (a).
(f) Conviction of giving a worthless check, as defined by K.S.A. 21-5821, and
amendments thereto, shall not be a prerequisite or bar to recovery pursuant to this
section.
(g) The service charge on a check which is dishonored by the drawee because the
maker or drawer had no deposits in or credits with the drawee or has not sufficient
funds in, or credits with, the drawee for the payment of each check, order or draft in full
upon its presentation, shall not exceed $30.
(h) As used in this section, "giving a worthless check" means the making, drawing,
issuing or delivering or causing or directing the making, drawing, issuing or delivering
of any check, order or draft on any bank, credit union, savings and loan association or
depository for the payment of money or its equivalent:
(1) With intent to defraud or in payment for a preexisting debt; or
(2) which is dishonored by the drawee because the maker or drawer had no deposits
in or credits with the drawee or has not sufficient funds in, or credits with, the drawee
for the payment of such check, order or draft in full upon its presentation; and
(3) for which the maker or drawer has not tendered to the holder's agent the amount
of money demanded and within the time allowed by the demand required in subsection
(b).
History: L. 1986, ch. 223, § 1; L. 1990, ch. 209, § 1; L. 1991, ch. 72, § 2; L. 1994, ch. 273, §
14; L. 1995, ch. 230, § 3; L. 1996, ch. 203, § 2; L. 2000, ch. 175, § 8; L. 2001, ch. 186, § 3; L.
2004, ch. 176, § 2; L. 2011, ch. 30, § 220; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1101.   Rights of persons with disabilities. It is hereby declared to be the policy of this state
to encourage and enable the blind, the visually disabled and persons who are otherwise
disabled to participate fully in the social and economic life of the state and to engage in
remunerative employment. Such persons shall have the same right as the able-bodied to
the full and free use of the streets, highways, sidewalks, walkways, public buildings,
public facilities and other public places; and such persons are entitled to full and equal
accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of: (a) All common carriers,
airplanes, motor vehicles, railroad trains, motor buses, street cars, boats or any other
public conveyances or modes of transportation; (b) hotels, lodging places and places of
public accommodation, amusement or resort, including food service establishments and
establishments for sale of food; and (c) other places to which the general public is
invited, subject only to the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable
alike to all persons.
History: L. 1969, ch. 54, § 1; L. 1984, ch. 159, § 1; L. 2003, ch. 64, § 2; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1102.   Same; use of guide dog by legally blind person. Every legally blind person shall have
the right to be accompanied by a guide dog, specially selected, trained and tested for the
purpose, in or upon any of the places listed in K.S.A. 39-1101, and amendments thereto,
in the acquisition and use of rental, residential housing and in the purchase and use of
residential housing without being required to pay an extra charge for the guide dog,
except that such person shall be liable for any damage done to the premises or facilities
by such dog.
History: L. 1969, ch. 54, § 2; L. 1987, ch. 155, § 1; L. 2003, ch. 64, § 3; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1103.   Same; unlawful to interfere with rights. Any person, firm, corporation, or the agent
of any person, firm or corporation, who denies or interferes with the exercise of the
rights recognized in K.S.A. 39-1101, 39-1102, 39-1107, 39-1108 or 39-1109, and
amendments thereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
History: L. 1969, ch. 54, § 3; L. 1989, ch. 127, § 2; L. 1992, ch. 205, § 13; L. 2003, ch. 64, §
4; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1104.   Same; safety day; proclamation; contents. Each year, the governor shall take suitable
public notice of October 15 as white cane safety day. He shall issue a proclamation in
which:
(a) He comments upon the significance of the white cane;
(b) he calls upon the citizens of the state to observe the provisions of the white cane
law and to take precautions necessary to the safety of the disabled;
(c) he reminds the citizens of the state of the policies with respect to the disabled
herein declared, and urges the citizens to cooperate in giving effect to them;
(d) he emphasizes the need of the citizens to be aware of the presence of disabled
persons in the community and to keep safe and functional for the disabled the streets,
highways, sidewalks, walkways, public buildings, public facilities, other public places,
places of public accommodation, amusement and resort and other places to which the
public is invited, and to offer assistance to disabled persons upon appropriate occasions.
History: L. 1969, ch. 54, § 5; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1105.   Same; employment. It is the policy of this state that the blind, the visually
handicapped and persons who are otherwise physically disabled shall be employed in
the service of the state, political subdivisions of the state, the public schools and in all
other employment supported in whole or in part by public funds, on the same terms and
conditions as the able-bodied, unless it is shown that the particular disability prevents
the performance of the work involved.
History: L. 1969, ch. 54, § 6; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1106.   Same; name and citation of act. This act shall be known and may be cited as the
Kansas white cane law.
History: L. 1969, ch. 54, § 7; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1107. Rights of persons with disabilities; use of hearing assistance dog by person who is deaf or
hard of hearing. Every person who is deaf or hard of hearing has the right to be
accompanied by a hearing assistance dog, specially selected, trained and tested for the
purpose of hearing assistance, in or upon any of the places listed in K.S.A. 39-1101, and
amendments thereto, in the acquisition and use of rental, residential housing and in the
purchase and use of residential housing without being required to pay an extra charge
for the hearing assistance dog. The person who is deaf or hard of hearing shall be liable
for any damage done to the premises or facilities by such dog.
History: L. 1982, ch. 184, § 1; L. 2003, ch. 64, § 5; L. 2022, ch. 75, § 6; April 28.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1108.   Same; use of service dog by person with disability. Every person with a disability shall
have the right to be accompanied by a service dog, specially selected, trained and tested
for the purpose which shall include, but not be limited to, pulling a wheelchair, opening
doors and picking up objects, in or upon any of the places listed in K.S.A. 39-1101, and
amendments thereto, in the acquisition and use of rental, residential housing and in the
purchase and use of residential housing without being required to pay an extra charge
for the service dog. Such person shall be liable for any damage done to the premises by
such dog.
History: L. 1989, ch. 127, § 1; L. 1992, ch. 205, § 14; L. 2003, ch. 64, § 6; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1109.   Use of assistance dog while training. Any professional trainer, from a recognized
training center, of an assistance dog, while engaged in the training of such dog, shall
have the right to be accompanied by such dog in or upon any of the places listed in
K.S.A. 39-1101, and amendments thereto, without being required to pay an extra charge
for such dog. Such trainer shall be liable for any damage done to the premises of
facilities by such dog.
History: L. 1992, ch. 205, § 12; L. 2003, ch. 64, § 7; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1110.   Use of professional therapy dog while training. Any qualified handler of a
professional therapy dog when accompanied by such dog and when using any
conveyance of public transportation available to all members of the general public, and
when renting and using accommodations in motels, hotels and other temporary lodging
places shall have the right to be accompanied by such dog in such places. Any owner or
employee of a business or retail establishment to which the public is invited, including
establishments which serve or sell food, shall admit a professional therapy dog,
accompanied by its qualified handler, to the business. The qualified handler shall be
liable for any damage done by the dog to any such conveyance or facility.
History: L. 2003, ch. 64, § 8; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1111.   Procedure for verification of person's right to be accompanied by assistance dog or
professional therapy dog. (a) If a question arises as to whether an assistance dog qualifies
under this act to accompany a person with a disability in or upon any place set forth in
K.S.A. 39-1101, and amendments thereto, the person with a disability may produce for
the employee or person responsible for such place an identification card or letter
conforming to the requirements of this subsection. Upon production of such
identification card or letter, the assistance dog shall be allowed to accompany the
person with a disability in or upon such place.
(1) If the assistance dog has been trained by a training facility, school or trainer, the
identification card or letter shall be provided by the training facility, school or trainer
that trained the dog and shall contain the following information: (A) The legal name of
the dog's user; (B) the name, address and telephone number of the facility, school or
trainer who trained the dog; (C) whether the dog is designated as a guide, hearing
assistance or service dog; and (D) a picture or digital photographic likeness of the dog
user and the dog. If a card is used, the picture or digital photographic likeness shall be
on the card. If a letter is used, the picture or digital photographic likeness shall either be
printed as a part of the letter or be affixed to the letter.
(2) If the assistance dog has been trained by the person using the dog, the identification
card or letter shall contain the following information: (A) The legal name of the dog's
user; (B) the dog user's address; (C) a statement that the dog has been trained to mitigate
the dog user's disability; and (D) a picture or digital photographic likeness of the dog
user and the dog. If a card is used, the picture or digital photographic likeness shall be
on the card. If a letter is used, the picture or digital photographic likeness shall either be
printed as a part of the letter or be affixed to the letter.
(b) If a question arises as to whether a dog handler is qualified, or whether the dog
accompanying the handler is qualified as a professional therapy dog, to enter in or upon
the places set forth in K.S.A. 39-1110, and amendments thereto, an employee or person
responsible for such places may request, and the qualified handler shall produce, an
identification card or letter, provided by the training facility, school or trainer who
trained the dog. Such card or letter shall contain the following information: (1) The legal
name of the qualified dog handler; (2) the name, address and telephone number of the
facility, school or trainer who trained the dog; (3) information documenting that the dog
is trained to provide therapeutic supports; and (4) a picture or digital photographic
likeness of the qualified handler and the dog. If a card is used, the picture or digital
photographic likeness shall be on the card. If a letter is used, the picture or digital
photographic likeness shall either be printed as a part of the letter or be affixed to the
letter.
(c) If a question arises as to whether an individual accompanied by a dog is a
professional trainer, from a recognized training center, of an assistance dog, in order to
enter in or upon a place set forth in K.S.A. 39-1101, and amendments thereto, an
employee or person responsible for such place may request, and the trainer shall
produce, an identification card provided by the recognized training center containing
the following information: (1) The legal name of the trainer; (2) the name of the training
center; (3) the address and telephone number of the training center; (4) the types of
functions for which dogs are trained by the center; and (5) a picture or digital
photographic likeness of the trainer.
(d) An identification card or letter produced for inspection pursuant to this section
shall be promptly returned to the person with a disability, the qualified handler or the
professional trainer after inspection.
History: L. 2003, ch. 64, § 9; July 1.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1112.   Unlawful misrepresentations. It is a class A nonperson misdemeanor for any
person to:
(a) Represent that such person has the right to be accompanied by an assistance dog in
or upon any place listed in K.S.A. 39-1101, and amendments thereto, or that such person
has a right to be accompanied by a professional therapy dog in or upon any place listed
in K.S.A. 39-1110, and amendments thereto, unless such person has the right to be
accompanied in or upon such place by such dog pursuant to this act; or
(b) represent that such person has a disability for the purpose of acquiring an
assistance dog unless such person has such disability.
History: L. 2003, ch. 64, § 10; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1113.   Assistance dogs and professional therapy dogs; definitions. As used in this act and in
K.S.A. 39-1101 through 39-1109, and amendments thereto:
(a) "Assistance dog" means any guide dog, hearing assistance dog or service dog.
(b) "Guide dog" means a dog which has been specially selected, trained and tested for
the purpose of guiding a person who is legally blind.
(c) "Hearing assistance dog" means a dog which is specially selected, trained and tested
to alert or warn individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing to specific sounds.
(d) "Professional therapy dog" means a dog which is selected, trained and tested to
provide specific physical or therapeutic functions, under the direction and control of a
qualified handler who works with the dog as a team, and as a part of the handler's
occupation or profession. Such dogs, with their handlers, perform such functions in
institutional settings, community based group settings, or when providing services to
specific persons who have disabilities. "Professional therapy dog" does not include dogs,
certified or not, which are used by volunteers for pet visitation therapy.
(e) "Service dog" means a dog which has been specially selected, trained and tested to
perform a variety of tasks for persons with disabilities. These tasks include, but are not
limited to: Pulling wheelchairs, lending balance support, picking up dropped objects or
providing assistance in, or to avoid, a medical crisis, or to otherwise mitigate the effects
of a disability.
(f) The presence of a dog for comfort, protection or personal defense does not qualify a
dog as being trained to mitigate an individual's disability and therefor does not qualify
the dog as an assistance dog covered under the provisions of this act.
History: L. 2003, ch. 64, § 1; July 1.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1114. Children parented by blind individuals; purpose of act; legislative findings. (a) The
purpose of K.S.A. 2025 Supp. 39-1114 through 39-1116, and amendments thereto, is to
protect the best interests of children parented by blind individuals or children who
could be parented by blind individuals through the establishment of procedural
safeguards that require adherence to the federal Americans with disabilities act of 1990,
and respect for the due process and equal protection rights of parents and prospective
parents who are blind in the context of child welfare, foster care, family law and
adoption.
(b) The legislature hereby finds and declares that:
(1) Blind individuals continue to face unfair, preconceived and unnecessary societal
biases as well as antiquated attitudes regarding such individuals' ability to successfully
parent their children;
(2) blind individuals face these biases and preconceived attitudes in family and
dependency law proceedings where legal custody, residency and parenting time are at
stake and in public and private adoption, guardianship and foster care proceedings;
(3) because of these societal biases and antiquated attitudes, children of blind parents
are unnecessarily being removed from their parents' care or being restricted from
enjoying meaningful time with their parents; and
(4) children are being denied the opportunity to enjoy the experience of living in
loving homes with blind parents or other blind caretakers.
History: L. 2022, ch. 75, § 1; April 28.
                                2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1115. Definitions. As used in K.S.A. 2025 Supp. 39-1114 through 39-1116, and
amendments thereto:
(a) "Blind" or "blindness" means a central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better
eye with the use of a correcting lens. An eye that has a limitation in the field of vision so
that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees
is considered to have a central visual acuity of 20/200 or less. The term "blind" or
"blindness" includes any degenerative condition that reasonably can be expected to
result in blindness.
(b) "Family foster home" means a child care facility that is a private residence,
including any adjacent grounds, where a person provides care for 24 hours per day for
one or more children in foster care and for which a license is required under K.S.A. 65-
501 et seq., and amendments thereto.
(c) "Supportive parenting services" means services, including, but not limited to,
services, aids and supports that may assist a parent or prospective parent who is blind
in the effective use of non-visual techniques and other alternative methods to enable the
parent or prospective parent to discharge parental responsibilities as successfully as a
parent who is not blind.
History: L. 2022, ch. 75, § 2; April 28.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

39-1116. Blindness of parent or prospective parent in parentage, dissolution of marriage, adoption,
guardianship and child in need of care cases; considerations and restrictions. (a) In any action
brought under article 22 or article 27 of chapter 23 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated,
and amendments thereto:
(1) A parent's blindness shall not serve as a basis for denial or restriction of legal
custody, residency or parenting time when such legal custody, residency or parenting
time is determined to be otherwise in the best interests of the child;
(2) (A) if a parent's blindness is alleged to not be in the best interests of a child, the
party asserting such allegation shall have the burden of proving by clear and convincing
evidence that the parent's blindness is not in the best interests of the child;
(B) if a party asserting an allegation described in subparagraph (A) has satisfied such
party's burden of proof, the blind parent shall have the opportunity to present evidence
that, with the implementation of supportive parenting services, placement with such
parent is in the best interests of the child; and
(C) the court may issue an order requiring that supportive parenting services be
implemented, and the parties may request that the court review the need for continuing
such supportive parenting services after a reasonable period of time; and
(3) if a court denies or otherwise restricts a blind parent's request for legal custody,
residency or parenting time, the court shall make specific findings of fact stating the
basis for its decision, including reasons why the provision of supportive parenting
services is not a reasonable accommodation that is required to prevent such denial or
restriction.
(b) In any action brought under article 21 of chapter 59 of the Kansas Statutes
Annotated, and amendments thereto, a prospective parent's blindness shall not serve as
a basis for the denial of such prospective parent's participation in any adoption when
such adoption is determined to be otherwise in the best interests of the child.
(c) In any action brought under article 30 of chapter 59 of the Kansas Statutes
Annotated, and amendments thereto, an individual's blindness shall not serve as a basis
for the denial of such individual's appointment as a guardian when such appointment is
determined to be otherwise in the best interests of the child.
(d) An individual's blindness shall not serve as a basis for the denial or restriction of
such individual's licensure as a family foster home.
(e) (1) In any action brought under article 22 of chapter 38 of the Kansas Statutes
Annotated, and amendments thereto, an individual's blindness shall not serve as a basis
for an order of temporary custody, adjudication, disposition, finding of unfitness or
termination of parental rights.
(2) If a court issues an order of temporary custody, adjudication, disposition, finding of
unfitness or termination of parental rights that is adverse to an individual who is a
party to the proceeding and who is blind, the court shall make specific findings of fact
stating the basis for its decision, including reasons why the provision of supportive
parenting services is not a reasonable accommodation that is required to prevent such
adverse order.
History: L. 2022, ch. 75, § 3; April 28.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-701.   Findings and purpose. (a) The legislature of the state of Kansas hereby finds and
determines that:
(1) The banking system is dependent upon fair and accurate credit reporting.
Inaccurate credit reports directly impair the efficiency of the banking system, and
unfair credit reporting methods undermine the public confidence which is essential to
the continued functioning of the banking system.
(2) An elaborate mechanism has been developed for investigating and evaluating the
credit worthiness, credit standing, credit capacity, character, and general reputation of
consumers.
(3) Consumer reporting agencies have assumed a vital role in assembling and
evaluating consumer credit and other information on consumers.
(4) There is a need to insure that consumer reporting agencies exercise their grave
responsibilities with fairness, impartiality, and a respect for the consumer's right to
privacy.
(b) It is the purpose of K.S.A. 50-701 to 50-722, inclusive, and amendments thereto, to
require that consumer reporting agencies adopt reasonable procedures for meeting the
needs of commerce for consumer credit, personnel, insurance, and other information in
a manner which is fair and equitable to the consumer, with regard to the
confidentiality, accuracy, relevancy, and proper utilization of such information in
accordance with the requirements of such sections of this act.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 136; January 1, 1974.
                                2025 Kansas Statutes

50-702. Definitions and rules of construction. The following words and phrases when used in
the fair credit reporting act shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
(a) The term "person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, estate,
cooperative, association, government or governmental subdivision or agency, or other
entity.
(b) The term "consumer" means an individual.
(c) The term "consumer report" means any written, oral, or other communication of
any information by a consumer reporting agency bearing on a consumer's credit
worthiness, credit standing, credit capacity, character, general reputation, personal
characteristics, or mode of living which is used or expected to be used or collected in
whole or in part for the purpose of serving as a factor in establishing the consumer's
eligibility for credit or insurance to be used primarily for personal, family, or household
purposes, or employment purposes, or other purposes authorized under K.S.A. 50-703,
and amendments thereto. The term does not include:
(1) Any report containing information solely as to transactions or experiences between
the consumer and the person making the report;
(2) any authorization or approval of a specific extension of credit directly or indirectly
by the issuer of a credit card or similar device; or
(3) any report in which a person who has been requested by a third party to make a
specific extension of credit directly or indirectly to a consumer conveys that decision
with respect to such request, if the third party advises the consumer of the name and
address of the person to whom the request was made and such person makes the
disclosures to the consumer required under K.S.A. 50-714, and amendments thereto.
(d) The term "investigative consumer report" means a consumer report or portion
thereof in which information on a consumer's character, general reputation, personal
characteristics, or mode of living is obtained through personal interviews with
neighbors, friends, or associates of the consumer reported on or with others with whom
the consumer is acquainted or who may have knowledge concerning any such items of
information. However, such information shall not include specific factual information
on a consumer's credit record obtained directly from a creditor of the consumer or from
a consumer reporting agency when such information was obtained directly from a
creditor of the consumer or from the consumer.
(e) The term "consumer reporting agency" means any person which, for monetary fees,
dues, or on a cooperative nonprofit basis, regularly engages in whole or in part in the
practice of assembling or evaluating consumer credit information or other information
on consumers for the purpose of furnishing consumer reports to third parties, and
which uses any means or facility of interstate commerce for the purpose of preparing or
furnishing consumer reports.
(f) The term "file," when used in connection with information on any consumer, means
all of the information on that consumer recorded and retained by a consumer reporting
agency regardless of how the information is stored.
(g) The term "employment purposes" when used in connection with a consumer report
means a report used for the purpose of evaluating a consumer for employment,
promotion, reassignment or retention as an employee.
(h) The term "medical information" means information or records obtained, with the
consent of the individual to whom it relates, from licensed physicians or medical
practitioners, hospitals, clinics, or other medical or medically related facilities.
(i) The term "clear and proper identification" means information generally deemed
sufficient to identify a person.
(j) The term "security freeze" means a notice placed on a consumer report, at the
request of the consumer and subject to certain exceptions, that prohibits a consumer
reporting agency from releasing the consumer's consumer report or credit score
relating to the extension of credit.
(k) The term "protected consumer" means an individual who is:
(1) Under the age of 16 years at the time a request for the placement of a security
freeze is made under K.S.A. 50-725, and amendments thereto; or
(2) an individual for whom a guardian or conservator has been appointed.
(l) The term "record" means a compilation of information about a protected consumer
that satisfies all of the following:
(1) The compilation identifies the protected consumer; and
(2) the compilation is created by a consumer reporting agency solely for the purpose of
complying with K.S.A. 50-725, and amendments thereto.
(m) The term "security freeze for a protected consumer" means one of the following:
(1) If a consumer reporting agency does not have a file pertaining to a protected
consumer, a restriction placed on the protected consumer's record that prohibits the
consumer reporting agency from releasing the protected consumer's record; or
(2) if a consumer reporting agency has a file pertaining to the protected consumer, a
restriction placed on the protected consumer's consumer report that prohibits the
consumer reporting agency from releasing the protected consumer's consumer report
or any information derived from the protected consumer's consumer report.
(n) The term "sufficient proof of authority" means documentation that shows a
representative has authority to act on behalf of a protected consumer, including any of
the following:
(1) An order issued by a court;
(2) a lawfully executed and valid power of attorney; or
(3) a written, notarized statement signed by a representative that expressly describes
the authority of the representative to act on behalf of a protected consumer.
(o) The term "sufficient proof of identification" means information or documentation
that identifies a protected consumer or a representative of a protected consumer,
including any of the following:
(1) A social security number or a copy of a social security card issued by the social
security administration; or
(2) a certified or official copy of a birth certificate issued by the entity authorized to
issue the birth certificate.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 137; L. 2006, ch. 149, § 11; L. 2009, ch. 112, § 1; L. 2016, ch. 37, §
2; January 1, 2017.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

50-703.   Permissible purposes of reports. A consumer reporting agency may furnish a
consumer report under the following circumstances and no other:
(a) In response to the order of a court having jurisdiction to issue such an order;
(b) in accordance with the written instructions of the consumer to whom it relates; and
(c) to a person which it has reason to believe
(1) intends to use the information in connection with a credit transaction involving the
consumer on whom the information is to be furnished and involving the extension of
credit to, or review or collection of an account of, the consumer; or
(2) intends to use the information for employment purposes; or
(3) intends to use the information in connection with the underwriting of insurance
involving the consumer; or
(4) intends to use the information in connection with a determination of the
consumer's eligibility for a license or other benefit granted by a governmental
instrumentality required by law to consider an applicant's financial responsibility or
status; or
(5) otherwise has a legitimate business need for the information in connection with a
business transaction involving the consumer.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 138; January 1, 1974.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-704.   Obsolete information. (a) Except as authorized under subsection (b) of this section,
no consumer reporting agency may make any consumer report containing any of the
following items of information:
(1) Bankruptcies which, from date of adjudication of the most recent bankruptcy,
antedate the report by more than fourteen (14) years;
(2) suits and judgments which, from date of entry, antedate the report by more than
seven (7) years or until the governing statute of limitations has expired, whichever is the
longer period;
(3) paid tax liens which, from date of payment, antedate the report by more than seven
(7) years;
(4) accounts placed for collection or charged to profit and loss which antedate the
report by more than seven (7) years;
(5) records of arrest, indictment, or conviction of crime which, from date of
disposition, release, or parole, antedate the report by more than seven (7) years; and
(6) any other adverse item of information which antedates the report by more than
seven (7) years.
(b) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section are not applicable in the case of any
consumer credit report to be used in connection with
(1) a credit transaction involving, or which may reasonably be expected to involve, a
principal amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or more;
(2) the underwriting of life insurance involving, or which may reasonably be expected
to involve, a face amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or more; or
(3) the employment of any individual at an annual salary which equals, or which may
reasonably be expected to equal twenty thousand dollars ($20,000), or more.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 139; January 1, 1974.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-705.   Disclosure of investigative consumer reports. (a) A person may not procure or cause to
be prepared an investigative consumer report on any consumer unless
(1) it is clearly and accurately disclosed to the consumer that an investigative
consumer report including information as to the consumer's character, general
reputation, personal characteristics, and mode of living, whichever are applicable, may
be made, and such disclosure (A) is made in a writing mailed, or otherwise delivered, to
the consumer, not later than three days after the date on which the report was first
requested, and (B) includes a statement informing the consumer of the right to request
the additional disclosures provided for under subsection (b) of this section; or
(2) the report is to be used for employment purposes for which the consumer has not
specifically applied.
(b) Any person who procures or causes to be prepared an investigative consumer
report on any consumer shall, upon written request made by the consumer within a
reasonable period of time after the receipt by him or her of the disclosure required by
subsection (a) (1) of this section, make a complete and accurate disclosure of the nature
and scope of the investigation requested. This disclosure shall be made in a writing
mailed, or otherwise delivered, to the consumer not later than five (5) days after the
date on which the request for such disclosure was received from the consumer or such
report was first requested, whichever is the later.
(c) No person may be held liable for any violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section
if that person shows by a preponderance of the evidence that at the time of the violation
the person maintained reasonable procedures to assure compliance with subsection (a)
or (b).
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 140; January 1, 1974.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

50-706.   Compliance procedures. (a) Every consumer reporting agency shall maintain
reasonable procedures designed to avoid violations of K.S.A. 50-704 and to limit the
furnishing of consumer reports to the purposes listed under K.S.A. 50-703. These
procedures shall require that prospective users of the information identify themselves,
certify the purposes for which the information is sought, and certify that the
information will be used for no other purpose. Every consumer reporting agency shall
make a reasonable effort to verify the identity of a new prospective user and the uses
certified by such prospective user prior to furnishing such user a consumer report. No
consumer reporting agency may furnish a consumer report to any person if it has
reasonable grounds for believing that the consumer report will not be used for a
purpose listed in K.S.A. 50-703.
(b) Whenever a consumer reporting agency prepares a consumer report it shall follow
reasonable procedures to assure maximum possible accuracy of the information
concerning the individual about whom the report relates.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 141; January 1, 1974.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-707.   Disclosures to governmental agencies. Notwithstanding the provisions of K.S.A. 50-
703, a consumer reporting agency may furnish identifying information respecting any
consumer, limited to name, address, former addresses, places of employment, or former
places of employment, to a governmental agency.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 142; January 1, 1974.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

50-708.   Disclosures to consumers. (a) Every consumer reporting agency shall, upon request
and proper identification of any consumer, clearly and accurately disclose to the
consumer:
(1) The nature and substance of all information (except medical information) in its
files on the consumer at the time of the request.
(2) The sources of the information; except that the sources of information acquired
solely for use in preparing an investigative consumer report and actually used for no
other purpose need not be disclosed: Provided, That in the event an action is brought
under the provisions of K.S.A. 50-701 to 50-722, inclusive, and amendments thereto, such
sources shall be available to the plaintiff under appropriate discovery procedures in the
court in which the action is brought.
(3) The recipients of any consumer report on the consumer which it has furnished
(A) for employment purposes within the two-year period preceding the request, and
(B) for any other purpose within the six-month period preceding the request.
(b) The requirements of subsection (a) respecting the disclosure of sources of
information and the recipients of consumer reports do not apply to information
received or consumer reports furnished prior to the effective date of this act except to
the extent that the matter involved is contained in the files of the consumer reporting
agency on that date.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 143; January 1, 1974.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-709.   Conditions of disclosure to consumers. (a) A consumer reporting agency shall make
the disclosures required under K.S.A. 50-708 during normal business hours and on
reasonable notice.
(b) The disclosures required under K.S.A. 50-708 shall be made to the consumer
(1) in person if the consumer appears in person and furnishes proper identification; or
(2) by telephone if the consumer has made a written request, with proper
identification, for telephone disclosure and the toll charge, if any, for the telephone call
is prepaid by or charged directly to the consumer.
(c) Any consumer reporting agency shall provide trained personnel to explain to the
consumer any information furnished to him or her pursuant to K.S.A. 50-708.
(d) The consumer shall be permitted to be accompanied by one other person of his or
her choosing, who shall furnish reasonable identification. A consumer reporting agency
may require the consumer to furnish a written statement granting permission to the
consumer reporting agency to discuss the consumer's file in such person's presence.
(e) Except as provided in K.S.A. 50-715 and 50-716, no consumer may bring any action
or proceeding in the nature of defamation, invasion of privacy, or negligence with
respect to the reporting of information against any consumer reporting agency, any user
of information, or any person who furnishes information to a consumer reporting
agency, based on information disclosed pursuant to K.S.A. 50-708, 50-709 or 50-714,
except as to false information furnished with malice or willful intent to injure such
consumer.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 144; January 1, 1974.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

50-710.   Procedure in case of disputed accuracy. (a) If the completeness or accuracy of any
item of information contained in his or her file is disputed by a consumer, and such
dispute is directly conveyed to the consumer reporting agency by the consumer, the
consumer reporting agency shall within a reasonable period of time reinvestigate and
record the current status of that information unless it has reasonable grounds to believe
that the dispute by the consumer is frivolous or irrelevant. If after such reinvestigation
such information is found to be inaccurate or can no longer be verified, the consumer
reporting agency shall promptly delete such information. The presence of contradictory
information in the consumer's file does not in and of itself constitute reasonable
grounds for believing the dispute is frivolous or irrelevant.
(b) If the reinvestigation does not resolve the dispute, the consumer may file a brief
statement setting forth the nature of the dispute. The consumer reporting agency may
limit such statements to not more than one hundred words if it provides the consumer
with assistance in writing a clear summary of the dispute.
(c) Whenever a statement of dispute is filed, unless there is reasonable grounds to
believe that it is frivolous or irrelevant, the consumer reporting agency shall, in any
subsequent consumer report containing the information in question, clearly note that it
is disputed by the consumer and provide either the consumer's statement or a clear and
accurate codification or summary thereof.
(d) Following any deletion of information which is found to be inaccurate or whose
accuracy can no longer be verified or any notation as to disputed information, the
consumer reporting agency shall, at the request of the consumer, furnish notification
that the item has been deleted or the statement, codification or summary pursuant to
subsection (b) or (c) of this section to any person specifically designated by the
consumer who has within two years prior thereto received a consumer report for
employment purposes, or within six months prior thereto received a consumer report
for any other purpose, which contained the deleted or disputed information. The
consumer reporting agency shall clearly and conspicuously disclose to the consumer his
or her rights to make such a request. Such disclosure shall be made at or prior to the
time the information is deleted or the consumer's statement regarding the disputed
information is received.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 145; January 1, 1974.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-711.   Charges for certain disclosures. A consumer reporting agency shall make all
disclosures pursuant to K.S.A. 50-708 and furnish all consumer reports pursuant to
K.S.A. 50-710(d) without charge to the consumer if, within thirty (30) days after receipt
by such consumer of a notification pursuant to K.S.A. 50-714 or notification from a debt
collection agency affiliated with such consumer reporting agency stating that the
consumer's credit rating may be or has been adversely affected, the consumer makes a
request under K.S.A. 50-708 or 50-710(d). Otherwise, the consumer reporting agency may
impose a reasonable charge on the consumer for making disclosure to such consumer
pursuant to K.S.A. 50-708, the charge for which shall be indicated to the consumer prior
to making disclosure; and for furnishing notifications, statements, summaries, or
codifications to persons designated by the consumer pursuant to K.S.A. 50-710(d), the
charge for which shall be indicated to the consumer prior to furnishing such
information and shall not exceed the charge that the consumer reporting agency would
impose on each designated recipient for a consumer report except that no charge may
be made for notifying such persons of the deletion of information which is found to be
inaccurate or which can no longer be verified.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 146; January 1, 1974.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

50-712.   Public record information for employment purposes. A consumer reporting agency
which furnishes a consumer report for employment purposes and which for that
purpose compiles and reports items of information on consumers which are matters of
public record and are likely to have an adverse effect upon a consumer's ability to
obtain employment shall
(a) at the time such public record information is reported to the user of such consumer
report, notify the consumer of the fact that public record information is being reported
by the consumer reporting agency, together with the name and address of the person to
whom such information is being reported; or
(b) maintain strict procedures designed to insure that whenever public record
information which is likely to have an adverse effect on a consumer's ability to obtain
employment is reported it is complete and up to date. For purposes of this paragraph,
items of public record relating to arrests, indictments, convictions, suits, tax liens, and
outstanding judgments shall be considered up to date if the current public record status
of the item at the time of the report is reported.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 147; January 1, 1974.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-713.   Restrictions on investigative consumer reports. Whenever a consumer reporting
agency prepares an investigative consumer report, no adverse information in the
consumer report (other than information which is a matter of public record) may be
included in a subsequent consumer report unless such adverse information has been
verified in the process of making such subsequent consumer report, or the adverse
information was received within the three-month period preceding the date the
subsequent report is furnished.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 148; January 1, 1974.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-714.   Requirements on users of consumer reports. (a) Whenever credit or insurance for
personal, family or household purposes, or employment involving a consumer is denied
or the charge for such credit or insurance is increased either wholly or partly because of
information contained in a consumer report from a consumer reporting agency, the
user of the consumer report shall so advise the consumer against whom such adverse
action has been taken and supply the name and address of the consumer reporting
agency making the report.
(b) Whenever credit for personal, family, or household purposes involving a consumer
is denied or the charge for such credit is increased either wholly or partly because of
information obtained from a person other than a consumer reporting agency bearing
upon the consumer's credit worthiness, credit standing, credit capacity, character,
general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living, the user of such
information shall, within a reasonable period of time, upon the consumer's written
request for the reasons for such adverse action received within sixty (60) days after
learning of such adverse action, disclose the nature of the information to the consumer.
The user of such information shall clearly and accurately disclose to the consumer the
right to make such written request at the time such adverse action is communicated to
the consumer.
(c) No person shall be held liable for any violation of this section if the person shows
by a preponderance of the evidence that at the time of the alleged violation he or she
maintained reasonable procedures to assure compliance with the provisions of
subsections (a) and (b).
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 149; January 1, 1974.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

50-715.   Civil liability for willful noncompliance. Any consumer reporting agency or user of
information which willfully fails to comply with any requirement imposed under K.S.A.
50-701 to 50-722, inclusive, and amendments thereto, with respect to any consumer is
liable to that consumer in an amount equal to the sum of
(a) any actual damages sustained by the consumer as a result of the failure;
(b) such amount of punitive damages as the court may allow; and
(c) in the case of any successful action to enforce any liability under this section, the
costs of the action together with reasonable attorney's fees as determined by the court.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 150; January 1, 1974.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-716.   Civil liability for negligent noncompliance. Any consumer reporting agency or user of
information which is negligent in failing to comply with any requirement imposed
under K.S.A. 50-701 to 50-722, inclusive, and amendments thereto, with respect to any
consumer is liable to that consumer in an amount equal to the sum of
(a) any actual damages sustained by the consumer as a result of the failure;
(b) in the case of any successful action to enforce any liability under this section, the
costs of the action together with reasonable attorney's fees as determined by the court.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 151; January 1, 1974.
                                    2025 Kansas Statutes

50-717.   Jurisdiction of courts; limitation of actions. An action to enforce any liability created
under the provisions of K.S.A. 50-701 to 50-722, inclusive, and amendments thereto, may
be brought in the district court of the county in which the controversy arose, within two
years from the date on which the liability arises, except that where a defendant has
materially and willfully misrepresented any information required under the provisions
of such sections of this act to be disclosed to an individual and the information so
misrepresented is material to the establishment of the defendant's liability to that
individual under such provisions of this act, the action may be brought at any time
within two years after discovery by the individual of the misrepresentation.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 152; January 1, 1974.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-718.   Obtaining information under false pretenses. Any person who knowingly and willfully
obtains information on a consumer from a consumer reporting agency under false
pretenses is guilty of a severity level 7, person felony and upon conviction shall be
punished in the manner provided by law.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 153; L. 2000, ch. 181, § 12; July 1.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

50-719.   Unauthorized disclosures by officers or employees. Any officer or employee of a
consumer reporting agency who knowingly and willfully provides information
concerning an individual from the agency's files to a person not authorized to receive
that information is guilty of a severity level 7, person felony and upon conviction shall
be punished in the manner provided by law.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 154; L. 2000, ch. 181, § 13; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-720.   Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of K.S.A. 50-701 to 50-719,
inclusive, and amendments thereto, for which penalties are not otherwise hereinbefore
provided shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished in the manner provided by law.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 155; January 1, 1974.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

50-721.   Enforcement by consumer credit commissioner. The consumer credit commissioner is
hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of K.S.A. 50-701 to 50-720, inclusive, and
amendments thereto, and for such purpose is hereby authorized to adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of the
provisions of such sections of this act.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 156; January 1, 1974.
                                   2025 Kansas Statutes

50-722. Citation of act. K.S.A. 50-701 through 50-725, and amendments thereto, may be
cited as the fair credit reporting act.
History: L. 1973, ch. 85, § 157; L. 2018, ch. 44, § 1; July 1.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

50-723. Security freeze on consumer report; requirements; procedure; damages. (a) A consumer
may elect to place a security freeze on the consumer's consumer report by written
request, sent by certified mail or regular mail, through a secure website if made
available by a consumer reporting agency, or by telephone, if the consumer reporting
agency does not have an available secure website. A consumer reporting agency shall
place a security freeze on a consumer's consumer report no later than five business days
after receiving:
(1) A request provided by this subsection; and
(2) proper identification.
(b) When a security freeze is in place, information from a consumer report shall not be
released to a third party without prior express authorization from the consumer. This
subsection shall not prevent a consumer reporting agency from advising a third party
that a security freeze is in effect with respect to a consumer report.
(c) The consumer reporting agency, no later than 10 business days after the date the
agency places a security freeze, shall provide the consumer with a unique personal
identification number, password or similar device to be used by the consumer when
providing authorization for the access to the consumer's consumer report for a specific
period of time. In addition, the consumer reporting agency shall simultaneously provide
to the consumer in writing the process of placing, removing and temporarily lifting a
security freeze and the process for allowing access to information from the consumer's
consumer report for a specific period while the security freeze is in effect.
(d) If, in connection with an application for credit or any other use, a third party
requests access to a consumer report on which a security freeze is in effect, the third
party may treat the application as incomplete if the consumer does not allow the
consumer's consumer report to be accessed for that specific period of time.
(e) If the consumer wishes to allow the consumer's consumer report or score to be
accessed for a specific period of time while a freeze is in place, the consumer shall
contact the consumer reporting agency, request that the freeze be temporarily lifted and
provide the following:
(1) Clear and proper identification;
(2) the unique personal identification number or password provided by the consumer
reporting agency in accordance with subsection (c); and
(3) the proper information regarding the time period for which the report shall be
available to users of the consumer report.
(f) (1) A consumer reporting agency that receives a request from a consumer to
temporarily lift a freeze on a consumer report pursuant to subsection (e) shall comply
with the request:
(A) No later than three business days after receiving the request if the request is made
at a postal address designated by the agency to receive such requests; or
(B) fifteen minutes after the request is received by the consumer reporting agency
through the electronic contact method chosen by the consumer reporting agency in
accordance with this section and such request is received between 6:00 a.m. and 9:30
p.m. in the central time zone.
(2) A consumer reporting agency is not required to temporarily lift a security freeze
within the time provided in subsection (f)(1)(B) if the consumer fails to meet the
requirements of subsection (e) or the consumer reporting agency's ability to temporarily
lift the security freeze within 15 minutes is prevented by:
(A) An act of God, including, but not limited to, fire, earthquake, hurricane, storm or
similar natural disaster or phenomena;
(B) unauthorized or illegal acts by a third party, including, but not limited to,
terrorism, sabotage, riot, vandalism, labor strikes or disputes disrupting operations or
similar occurrence;
(C) operational interruption, including, but not limited to, electrical failure,
unanticipated delay in equipment or replacement part delivery, computer hardware or
software failures inhibiting response time or similar disruption;
(D) governmental action, including, but not limited to, emergency orders or
regulations, judicial or law enforcement action or similar directives;
(E) regularly scheduled maintenance, other than during normal business hours, of or
updates to the consumer reporting agency's systems; or
(F) commercially reasonable maintenance of or repair to the consumer reporting
agency's systems that is unexpected or unscheduled.
(g) A consumer reporting agency shall remove or temporarily lift a freeze placed on a
consumer's consumer report only in the following cases:
(1) Upon consumer request as provided in this section; or
(2) if the consumer's consumer report was frozen due to a material misrepresentation
of fact by the consumer, in which case, if a consumer reporting agency intends to
remove a freeze upon the consumer's consumer report, the consumer reporting agency
shall notify the consumer in writing prior to removing the freeze on the consumer's
consumer report.
(h) A security freeze shall remain in place until the consumer requests that the
security freeze be removed. A consumer reporting agency shall remove a security freeze
within three business days after receiving a request for removal from the consumer,
who shall be required to provide:
(1) Clear and proper identification; and
(2) the unique personal identification number or password provided by the consumer
reporting agency in accordance with subsection (c).
(i) A security freeze does not apply to a consumer report provided to:
(1) A federal, state or local governmental entity, including a law enforcement agency
or court, or agents or assigns thereof;
(2) a private collection agency for the sole purpose of assisting in the collection of an
existing debt of the consumer who is the subject of the consumer report requested;
(3) a person or entity, or a subsidiary, affiliate or agent of such person or entity, or an
assignee of a financial obligation owing by the consumer to such person or entity, or a
prospective assignee of a financial obligation owing by the consumer to such person or
entity in conjunction with the proposed purchase of the financial obligation, with which
the consumer has or had prior to assignment of an account or contract, including a
demand deposit account, or to whom the consumer issued a negotiable instrument, for
the purposes of reviewing the account or collecting the financial obligation owing for
the account, contract, or negotiable instrument. For purposes of this paragraph,
"reviewing the account" includes activities related to account maintenance, monitoring,
credit line increases and account upgrades and enhancements;
(4) a subsidiary, affiliate, agent, assignee or prospective assignee of a person to whom
access has been granted under subsection (e) for the purposes of facilitating the
extension of credit;
(5) a person providing a credit report for the purposes permitted under 15 U.S.C. §
1681b(c);
(6) any person providing a consumer with a copy of the consumer's own report at such
consumer's request;
(7) a child support enforcement agency;
(8) a consumer reporting agency that acts only as a reseller of credit information by
assembling and merging information contained in the database of another consumer
reporting agency or multiple consumer reporting agencies and does not maintain a
permanent database of credit information from which new consumer reports are
produced; however, a consumer reporting agency acting as a reseller shall honor any
security freeze placed on a consumer report by another consumer reporting agency;
(9) a check services or fraud prevention services company, which issues reports on
incidents of fraud or authorizations for the purpose of approving or processing
negotiable instruments, electronic funds transfers or similar methods of payments;
(10) a deposit account information service company which issues to inquiring banks or
other financial institutions, for use only in reviewing a consumer request for a deposit
account at the inquiring bank or financial institution, reports regarding account
closures due to fraud, substantial overdrafts, ATM abuse or similar negative information
regarding a consumer;
(11) an employer in connection with any application for employment with the
employer;
(12) any person administering a credit file monitoring subscription service to which
the consumer has subscribed; or
(13) any person or entity for use in setting or adjusting a rate, adjusting a claim or
underwriting for insurance purposes.
(j) A consumer reporting agency shall not charge a fee for placing, temporarily lifting
or removing each freeze or for replacing a previously requested personal identification
number.
(1) A person who has learned or reasonably suspects that the person has been a victim
of identity theft may contact the local law enforcement agency that has jurisdiction over
the person's actual residence, which shall take a police report of the matter, and provide
the complainant with a copy of that report. Notwithstanding the fact the jurisdiction
may be elsewhere for investigation and prosecution of a crime of identity theft, any
local or state law enforcement agency shall take the complaint and provide the
complainant with a copy of the complaint and may refer the complainant to a law
enforcement agency in a different jurisdiction.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to interfere with the discretion of a law
enforcement agency to allocate resources for investigation of crimes. A complaint filed
under this section is not required to be counted as an open case for statistical reporting
purposes.
(k) If a security freeze is in place, a consumer reporting agency shall not change any of
the following official information in the consumer report without sending a written
confirmation of the change to the consumer within 30 days after the change is posted to
the consumer's file: Name, date of birth, social security number and address. Written
confirmation is not required for technical modifications of a consumer's official
information, including name and street abbreviations, complete spellings or
transposition of numbers or letters. In the case of an address change, the written
confirmation shall be sent to both the new address and to the former address.
(l) Any person who willfully fails to comply with any requirement imposed under this
subchapter* with respect to any consumer is liable to that consumer in an amount equal
to the sum of:
(1) Actual damages sustained by the consumer as a result of the failure or damages of
not less than $100 and not more than $1,000; or
(2) such amount of punitive damages as the court may allow; and
(3) in the case of any successful action to enforce any liability under this section, the
costs of the action together with reasonable attorney's fees as determined by the court.
(m) Any person who obtains a consumer report, requests a security freeze, requests
the temporary lift of a freeze, or the removal of a security freeze from a consumer
reporting agency under false pretenses or in an attempt to violate federal or state law
shall be liable to the consumer reporting agency for actual damages sustained by the
consumer reporting agency or $1,000, whichever is greater.
(n) Any person who is negligent in failing to comply with any requirement imposed
under this section with respect to any consumer, is liable to that consumer in an amount
equal to the sum of:
(1) Any actual damages sustained by the consumer as a result of the failure; and
(2) in the case of any successful action to enforce any liability under this section, the
costs of the action together with reasonable attorney's fees as determined by the court.
(o) Upon a finding by the court that an unsuccessful pleading, motion or other paper
filed in connection with an action under this section was filed in bad faith or for
purposes of harassment, the court shall award to the prevailing party attorney's fees
reasonable in relation to the work expended in responding to the pleading, motion or
other paper.
(p) This section shall be part of and supplemental to the fair credit reporting act.
(q) This section shall take effect and be in force on and after January 1, 2007.
(r) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the exclusive authority
to bring an action for any violation of subsection (f)(1)(B) shall be with the attorney
general.
History: L. 2006, ch. 149, § 12; L. 2009, ch. 112, § 2; L. 2018, ch. 44, § 2; July 1.
                                  2025 Kansas Statutes

50-724.   Security freeze; exceptions. (a) Nothing in K.S.A. 50-723, and amendments thereto,
shall be construed to require the following to place a security freeze on a consumer
report:
(1) A check services or fraud prevention services company, which issues reports on
incidents of fraud or authorizations for the purpose of approving or processing
negotiable instruments, electronic funds transfers, or similar methods of payments;
(2) a deposit account information service company which issues to inquiring banks or
other financial institutions, for use only in reviewing a consumer request for a deposit
account at the inquiring bank or financial institution, reports regarding account
closures due to fraud, substantial overdrafts, ATM abuse or similar negative information
regarding a consumer;
(3) a consumer reporting agency that acts as a reseller of credit information that
assembles or merges information contained in the database of another consumer
reporting agency or multiple consumer reporting agencies and does not maintain a
permanent database of credit information from which new consumer reports are
produced;
(4) any database or file which consists solely of any information adverse to the
interests of the consumer, including, but not limited to, criminal record information,
which is used for fraud prevention or detection, tenant screening, employment
screening or any purpose permitted by the federal fair credit reporting act, 15 U.S.C. §
1681b;
(5) a person to the extent such person offers fraud prevention services that issues
reports on incidents of fraud or reports used primarily in the detection or prevention of
fraud; or
(6) any bank, savings bank, trust company, savings and loan association, credit union
or any other financial institution regulated by the state of Kansas or any agency of the
United States.
(b) This section shall be part of and supplemental to the fair credit reporting act.
(c) This section shall take effect and be in force on and after January 1, 2007.
History: L. 2006, ch. 149, § 13; July 1.
                                 2025 Kansas Statutes

50-725. Security freeze for protected consumers; requirements; procedure. (a) A consumer
reporting agency shall place a security freeze for a protected consumer if the consumer
reporting agency receives a request from the protected consumer's representative for
the placement of the security freeze and the protected consumer's representative:
(1) Submits the request to the consumer reporting agency at the address or other point
of contact and in the manner specified by the consumer reporting agency;
(2) provides to the consumer reporting agency sufficient proof of identification of the
protected consumer and the representative; and
(3) provides to the consumer reporting agency sufficient proof of authority to act on
behalf of the protected consumer.
(b) If a consumer reporting agency does not have a record pertaining to a protected
consumer when the consumer reporting agency receives a request under subsection (a),
the consumer reporting agency shall create a record for the protected consumer.
(c) Within 30 days after receiving a request that meets the requirements of subsection
(a), a consumer reporting agency shall place a security freeze for the protected
consumer.
(d) Unless a security freeze for a protected consumer is removed in accordance with
subsection (f) or (i), a consumer reporting agency shall not release the protected
consumer's consumer report, any information derived from the protected consumer's
consumer report, or any record created for the protected consumer.
(e) A security freeze for a protected consumer placed under subsection (c) shall remain
in effect until:
(1) The protected consumer or the protected consumer's representative requests the
consumer reporting agency to remove the security freeze in accordance with subsection
(f); or
(2) the security freeze is removed in accordance with subsection (i).
(f) If a protected consumer or a protected consumer's representative wishes to remove
a security freeze for a protected consumer, the protected consumer or the protected
consumer's representative shall:
(1) Submit a request for the removal of the security freeze to the consumer reporting
agency at the address or other point of contact and in the manner specified by the
consumer reporting agency; and
(2) provide to the consumer reporting agency sufficient proof of identification of the
protected consumer and:
(A) For a request by the protected consumer, proof that the sufficient proof of
authority for the protected consumer's representative to act on behalf of the protected
consumer is no longer valid; or
(B) for a request by the representative of a protected consumer, sufficient proof of
identification of the representative and sufficient proof of authority to act on behalf of
the protected consumer.
(g) A consumer reporting agency shall not charge a fee for any service performed
under this section.
(h) This section shall not apply to:
(1) A person administering a credit file monitoring subscription service to which the
protected consumer has subscribed or the representative of the protected consumer has
subscribed on behalf of the protected consumer;
(2) a person providing the protected consumer or the protected consumer's
representative with a copy of the protected consumer's consumer report on request of
the protected consumer or the protected consumer's representative; or
(3) a person or entity listed in K.S.A. 50-723(i)(1) and (6) through (12) or 50-724(a)(1)
through (5), and amendments thereto.
(i) A consumer reporting agency may remove a security freeze for a protected
consumer or delete a record of a protected consumer if such security freeze was placed
or the record was created based on a material misrepresentation of a fact by the
protected consumer or the protected consumer's representative.
(j) Any person who fails to comply with any requirement imposed under this section
with respect to any protected consumer shall be liable pursuant to the provisions of the
fair credit reporting act.
(k) This section shall be part of and supplemental to the fair credit reporting act.
History: L. 2016, ch. 37, § 1; L. 2018, ch. 44, § 3; July 1.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

12-16,120. Prohibiting rent control or control of real estate purchase price by political subdivisions;
exceptions. (a) No political subdivision of this state, including, but not limited to, a county,
municipality or township, shall enact, maintain or enforce any ordinance or resolution
that would have the effect of controlling the amount of rent charged or the purchase
price agreed upon between the parties to the transaction for the lease or purchase of
privately owned residential or commercial property.
(b) This section shall not impair the right of any political subdivision to manage and
control commercial or residential property in which such political subdivision has an
ownership interest.
(c) This section shall not impair the right of any owner of privately owned property to
enter into a voluntary agreement with a political subdivision to agree to requirements
that would have the effect of controlling the amount of rent charged or the purchase
price agreed upon between the parties to the transaction for the lease or purchase of
privately owned property in return for grants or incentives provided by the political
subdivision to the owner of privately owned property.
(d) No political subdivision shall require any owner of privately owned property to
agree to any requirements that would have the effect of controlling the amount of rent
charged or the purchase price agreed upon between the parties to the transaction for
the lease or purchase of privately owned property, as a condition for consideration or
approval of:
(1) Any building permit or plat; or
(2) any request for a zoning regulation, boundary, classification or a conditional use
permit, or for a change or variance in a zoning regulation, boundary, classification or a
conditional use permit.
History: L. 2001, ch. 134, § 2; L. 2016, ch. 104, § 4; July 1.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

12-16,123.   Cities and counties prohibited from requiring lists of tenants; exceptions. (a) As used in
this section, "municipality" means any city or county or agency, department or other
division of a city or county.
(b) Except as provided by subsection (c) and as necessary to comply with the Kansas
offender registration act, K.S.A. 22-4901 et seq., and amendments thereto, no
municipality shall adopt or enforce an ordinance or resolution which requires any
landlord to provide to such municipality a list of names of any tenants of such landlord.
(c) A municipality may require a landlord to provide to the municipality a list of the
names of tenants occupying the landlord's property if a citation for a violation of an
ordinance or resolution adopted to protect the public health, safety or welfare has
occurred on such property. Such list shall not be required to be provided until at least 30
days following the date of the issuance of a citation. Such list shall not be required if the
landlord complies with the provisions of such ordinance or resolution.
History: L. 2001, ch. 147, § 2; July 1.
                                     2025 Kansas Statutes

12-16,138. Cities; counties; prohibiting periodic interior inspections of residential property;
exceptions. (a) No city or county shall adopt, enforce or maintain a residential property
licensing ordinance or resolution which includes a requirement for periodic interior
inspections of privately owned residential property for city or county code violations
unless the lawful occupant has consented to such interior inspections. This subsection
shall not apply to inspections of mixed-use residential and commercial property. This
subsection shall not prohibit a city or county from conducting plan reviews, periodic
construction inspections or final occupancy inspections as required by building permits.
(b) Any lawful occupant residing in privately owned residential housing located within
the corporate limits of a city may request an inspection at any time by the city or, if the
property is located in the unincorporated area of the county, by the county to determine
code violations.
History: L. 2016, ch. 104, § 3; July 1.
