GH Real Estate approved legal-source text chunk — GH-OP-01_Overland-Park-Rental-Property-Civil-Rights-Code_CURRENT.part-001.txt — verified through 2026-07-12. Official source text controls.

F. Tenant shall mean any person who has a severable or nonseverable interest in the real
   property either by oral or written lease or covenant, or by other methods of conveying a
   limited interest in such lands; or any person who occupies or has possession of such real
   property.
G. Perennial violator shall mean any person who shows an annual pattern of failing to
   comply with this Act which may be shown by repeated notices of abatement, notices of costs,
   or previous violations of this Act.
H. Nuisance shall mean any condition which causes or creates an unreasonable interference
   with the rights of the general public and shall include, but not be limited to, graffiti, rank
   vegetation; rank or infested compost heaps; dense smoke; excessive dust, ash, or fine
   particles in the air; rank ponds or standing water including swimming pools, water
   receptacles, and undrained areas; cesspools creating on or rising to the surface; rank odors;
   unkempt trash, refuse, brush and limbs, debris or building materials; rank sewage or septic
   system; excessive accumulation of animal waste; exposed animal carcasses after death;
   sheds, garages, or other out-buildings allowing infestation of rodents or insects or left
   unsecured to allow entry of animals, humans, or the natural elements such as rain, hail and
   snow, or otherwise left unkempt or unsightly, except for outdoor dog or pet houses
   maintained in a clean and reasonable manner; trees, shrubs, or plants which are dead,
   diseased or infested which present a harmful or dangerous condition to the public; exposed
   refrigerators or freezers, or other appliances left unsecured; private streets on residential
   and commercial properties containing potholes or other conditions creating safety hazards
   for pedestrians or motor vehicles; encroachments in the public right-of-way for private
   purposes which create a safety hazard including, but not limited to, fixed basketball goals and
   masonry mailbox enclosures; surface discharge from sump pumps or other subsurface
   drainage lines in a manner that causes buildup of algae or ice that endangers pedestrian or
   vehicular traffic; and any other condition which is determined to present a dangerous or
   harmful condition to the public.
I. Unsafe structure shall mean any structure or part of a structure which remains or is
   damaged to present a dangerous or unsafe condition to the public including, but not limited
   to, structures damaged by fire, damaged by natural events or elements such as wind,
   tornadoes, earthquakes, flooding or settling of the ground; damaged by insect infestation;
   damaged due to the failure to provide reasonable maintenance; structures occupied or
   unoccupied which have broken windows, missing boards or siding, unsecured doors, or
   unsecured openings which allow the harboring of animals, insects, transients, or create an
   attraction to children; structures which, due to the opinion of qualified experts or inspectors,




                                                                                           Page 3
      including but not limited to, fire, engineering, or architectural experts, present an unsafe or
      dangerous condition to those on or near the property; unfinished structures where no
      occupancy permit has been issued, and any building permit has lapsed for more than 30
      days; structures which remain unfinished, or without an occupancy permit, after 18 months
      from the date of the first building permit and where no inspection for newly completed work
      has been requested from the City within the last 45 days.
    J. Qualified expert shall mean a person who is regularly employed to conduct structural
       inspections to comply with life, safety, mechanical, health, and building codes or a licensed
       professional in the field of engineering or architecture.
   K. Graffiti shall mean any drawing, painting, writing, inscription, figure or mark, regardless of
      its content, of the type which is commonly known and referred to as "graffiti," which is
      written, drawn, painted, sprayed, scratched or otherwise placed or affixed, regardless of the
      nature of the material used, on any wall, window, rock, building or portion thereof, fence,
      gate, sign, utility box, utility pole, other structure, tree or other real or personal property,
      either publicly or privately owned, and that is visible from any adjacent public or private
      property or public or private right-of-way.
(History: Ord. ROCR-3305 §3, 2020; Ord. EGD-2948 §1, 2012; NU-2877 §1, 2011; NU-2601 §1,
2006; NU-1719 § 1, 92; NU-1382 §1, 86)

7.04.180 Nuisances or Unsafe Structures Unlawful; Responsibility to Abate.
   A. It shall be unlawful for any property owner, representative, tenant, or other such person with
      control, occupancy, or possession of real property to allow or maintain a nuisance or unsafe
      structure to exist on any lot or parcel of land within the City, including any areas between the
      property lines of said lot or parcel and the center line of any adjacent street or alley including
      sidewalks, streets, alleys, easements and rights-of-way.
   B. The property owner, representative, tenant or other such person with control, occupancy, or
      possession of real property shall be responsible for the abatement of any nuisance or unsafe
      structure.
(History: Ord. NU-1382 §1, 86)

7.04.190 Enforcement Against Nuisances; Designation of Officer; Order of
Abatement; Hearing; Notice to Appear.
   A. The Governing Body hereby delegates to the City Manager the authority to designate a public
      officer to be charged with the administration and enforcement of this Act as it concerns
      nuisances. The public officer shall authorize the investigation of violations of the Act. If it is
      determined that a violation of this Act exists, then the officer shall file a written report with
      the City Clerk and direct that an order of abatement be sent to the property owner,
      representative, or tenant. The Governing Body, by resolution, also may make such
      determination;
   B. Except as provided by Subsection C, the order of abatement shall be served on the owner or
      agent of such property by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, or if
      the same is unoccupied and the owner is a nonresident, then by mailing a notice by certified
      mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner.




                                                                                                Page 4
   C. If the owner or agent of the owner of the property has failed to accept delivery or otherwise
      failed to effectuate receipt of an order sent pursuant to this Section during the preceding 24-
      month period, the City may provide notice of the issuance of any further orders to abate or
      remove a nuisance from such property in the manner provided by Subsection B or as
      provided in this Subsection. Except as specifically provided in this Subsection, the City may
      may provide notice of the order by such methods including, but not limited to, door hangers,
      conspicuously posting notice of such order on the property, personal notification, telephone
      communication or first class mail. If the property is unoccupied and the owner is a
      nonresident, notice provided by this Section shall be given by telephone communication or
      first class mail.
   D. The order of abatement shall state:
       1. A common or legal description of the property, or both;
       2. That the property is in violation of the Act;
       3. The nature of the violation, including relevant ordinances, with sufficient information that
          would reasonably allow the recipient to determine the nature of the violation to allow for
          self-abatement;
       4. That the condition creating the violation shall be abated within a designated time period,
          not exceeding 10 days from the date of the notice, provided that extensions of such 10-day
          time period shall be granted if the owner or agent of the owner of the property
          demonstrates that due diligence is being exercised in abating the nuisance;
       5. That the recipient, upon written request, may obtain a hearing before a designated
          hearing officer, provided such request is received by the City Clerk prior to the expiration
          of the designated waiting period;
       6. That failure to comply with the order of abatement shall result in the abating the violation
          with the assessment of costs made against the property or by filing for judgment against
          the recipient;
       7. That failure to pay such assessments within 30 days of the notice of costs shall result in
          the filing of a tax lien against the property, or the filing for judgment against the recipient,
          or both;
       8. That such violations are subject to prosecution.
   E. If the recipient of the order of abatement makes a written request for hearing within the
      waiting period, then the City shall immediately schedule a hearing before a designated
      hearing officer. The hearing officer shall receive evidence, review the investigation, and
      prepare a written order. The order shall be sent by certified mail to all relevant parties within
      10 days of the hearing, unless otherwise stated at the hearing, and prior to the City taking any
      action to abate the violation. The order shall describe the relevant facts relied upon, state the
      specific Code provisions being relied upon should a violation be found, and state any such
      other stipulations, methods of abatement, or orders as deemed necessary by the hearing
      officer.
   F. If an authorized public officer determines that a violation of this Act exists, he or she may
      issue a Notice to Appear in Municipal Court for such violation. No other procedures are
      required as a prerequisite to the issuance of a Notice to Appear.
(History: Ord. NU-2601 § 2, 2006; NU-2299 §1, 2001; NU-1382 §1, 86)




                                                                                                  Page 5
7.04.200 Abatement of Nuisance by City; Notice of Costs; Assessment and
Collection.
   A. If the recipient of the order of abatement fails to comply with the order within the period of
      time designated in the order, or fails to comply with the order after a hearing on the matter,
      then the City may go onto the property to abate the violation in a reasonable manner. The
      City shall not be responsible for damage to property due to reasonable methods of gaining
      entrance onto the property or for damages to property in the reasonable exercise of its duty
      to the public to abate the violations. The City may use its own employees or contract for
      services to abate violations of the Act.
   B. If the City takes action to abate the violation, it shall provide a Notice of Costs to the property
      owner, representative, or tenant. The Notice of Costs shall be delivered by certified mail,
      return receipt requested, at the last known mailing address; or if the property is vacant or
      unoccupied, the Notice of Costs shall also be posted on the property in a reasonable manner.
      The recipient shall have 30 days from the date of the Notice to make full payment. The Notice
      of Costs shall state:
       1. The common or legal description of the property, or both;
       2. The nature of the violation, including relevant ordinances;
       3. The nature of the work performed to abate the violation;
       4. The costs incurred for the abatement of the violations in either a lump sum or in itemized
          form;
       5. That the notice is a demand for payment within 30 days from the date of notice;
       6. That failure to pay the entire amount within 30 days shall allow the City to file a tax lien
          against the property or to pursue litigation for the recovery of the costs, or both;
       7. That such additional remedies to recover costs shall include additional amounts including
          additional administrative costs, attorneys' fees when applicable, and interest;
       8. That payments shall be made by check or money order made payable to the City of
          Overland Park, Kansas, with no post-dating of the check, and sent to the address as stated
          within the notice with a written indication of the purpose for the payment and the
          address of the property where the violations occurred. Partial payments will not be
          accepted and shall be considered as non-payments.
   C. If the payment of costs is not made within the 30-day period, the City may levy a special
      assessment for such costs against the lot or piece of land. The City Clerk at the time of
      certifying other City taxes to the County Clerk shall certify the aforesaid costs, and the County
      Clerk shall extend the same on the tax roll of the county against the lot or parcel of ground,
      and it shall be collected by the county treasurer and paid to the City as other City taxes are
      collected and paid. Provided further, the City may collect the costs in the manner provided at
      K.S.A. 12-1,115, as amended, by bringing an action in the appropriate court as a personal
      debt. The City may pursue both assessment and collection at the same time until the full cost,
      including applicable interests, court costs, attorneys' fees, and administrative costs have been
      paid in full. (Ref. K.S.A. 12-1617e, as amended).
(History: Ord. NU-2601 § 3, 2006; NU-1382 §1, 86)

7.04.220 Excavation Fill.


                                                                                                 Page 6
It shall be the duty of the property owner, representative or the tenant, upon removal of a
structure, to fill any basement or other excavation located upon the premises and take any other
action necessary to leave such premises in a safe condition including the grading and seeding or
sodding of the area, removal of dirt or mud from roads, streets, alleys, or sidewalks, to allow for
proper drainage of the site, and to remove any and all refuse, trash, debris, brush and limbs, or
materials from the site.
(History: Ord. NU-1382 §1, 86)

7.04.230 Removal of Unsafe Structures; Salvage, Sale; Assessment and
Collection Of Costs; Procedure.
   A. If the owner of any structure has failed to commence the repair or removal of such structure
      within the time stated in the resolution or has failed to diligently prosecute the same
      thereafter, the City may proceed to raze and remove such structure, make the premises safe
      and secure, or let the same to contract. The City shall keep an account of the cost of such
      work and may sell the salvage from such structure and apply the proceeds or any necessary
      portion thereof to pay the cost of removing such structure and making the premises safe and
      secure. All moneys in excess of that necessary to pay such costs, after the payment of all costs,
      shall be paid to the owner of the premises upon which the structure was located.
   B. The City shall give notice to the owner of such structure by certified mail, return receipt
      requested, of the total cost incurred by the City in removing such structure and making the
      premises safe and secure. Such notice also shall state that payment of such cost is due and
      payable within 30 days following receipt of such notice. If the cost is not paid within the 30-
      day period and if there is no salvageable material or if moneys received from the sale of
      salvage or from the proceeds of any insurance policy in which the City has created a lien
      pursuant to K.S.A. 40-3901 et seq., and amendments thereto, are insufficient to pay the cost
      of such work, the balance shall be collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, as
      amended, or shall be assessed as a special assessment against the lot or parcel of land on
      which the structure was located and the City Clerk at the time of certifying other City taxes,
      shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs and the County Clerk shall extend the same on the
      tax rolls of the county against such lot or parcel of land. The City may pursue collection both
      by levying a special assessment and in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, as amended,
      but only until the full cost and any applicable interest has been paid in full.
      Whenever any structure is removed from any premises under the provisions of this act, the
      City Clerk shall certify to the county appraiser that such structure, describing the same, has
      been removed.
   C. If there is no salvageable material, or if the moneys received from the sale of salvage or from
      the proceeds of any insurance policy in which the City has created a lien pursuant to K.S.A.
      40-3901 et seq., and amendments thereto, are insufficient to pay the costs of the work, such
      costs or any portion thereof in excess of that received from the sale of salvage or any
      insurance proceeds may be financed, until the costs are paid, out of the general fund or by the
      issuance of no-fund warrants. Whenever no-fund warrants are issued under the authority of
      this act, the Governing Body of such City shall make a tax levy at the first tax levying period
      for the purpose of paying such warrants and the interest thereon. All such tax levies shall be
      in addition to all other levies authorized or limited by law and shall not be subject to the
      aggregate tax levy prescribed in article 19 of chapter 79 of the Kansas Statutes Annotated,




                                                                                               Page 7
      and amendments thereto. Such warrants shall be issued, registered, redeemed and bear
      interest in the manner and in the form prescribed by K.S.A. 79-2940, and amendments
      thereto, except they shall not bear the notation required by that section and may be issued
      without the approval of the state board of tax appeals. All moneys received from special
      assessments levied under the provisions of this section or from an action under K.S.A. 12-
      1,115, as amended, when and if paid, shall be placed in the general fund of the City.
(History: Ord. NU-1382 §1, 86)

7.04.280 Immediate Hazards.
In the event the public officer authorized under this Act determines that a nuisance or unsafe
structure exists which creates an immediate hazard, then the City shall proceed, without delay, to
take steps to abate the situation and without prior notice to or hearing of the owner, representative,
or tenant. The cost of such action shall be assessed as set forth in Chapter 7.28 of this Code, or
pursuant to K.S.A. 12-1,115, as amended, or both.
(History: Ord. NU-1382 §1, 86)

7.04.290 Right of Entry; Unlawful Interference; Penalty.
    A. Any authorized officer or agent of the City, pursuant to this Act, shall be allowed to enter onto
       any land within the City limits to investigate violations of this Act or for the abatement of
       violations pursuant to this Act.
    B. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with a public officer or agent of the City in
       performing his or her duties pursuant to this Act whether investigating or abating violations.
    C. Any person who interferes with an officer or agent of the City pursuant to this Act shall be
       punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this Code.
(History: Ord. NU-1382 §1, 86)

7.04.300 Penalty.
   A. Any property owner, representative, tenant, or person found in violation of this Act shall be
      subject to prosecution in the Overland Park Municipal Court. Any such person found guilty of
      violating the provisions of this Act shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more
      than $500 and not more than 10 days in jail, or both a fine and jail sentence. Any person
      found guilty of this Act two or more times within any one-year period, or determined by the
      Municipal Court to be a perennial violator, shall be fined not less than $250 nor more than
      $500 and shall be subject to a sentence not to exceed 30 days in jail, or both a fine and a jail
      sentence.
   B. Prosecution of any offender under this Act does not limit the City's right to pursue
      assessment or collection of costs as stated in this Act, or by other laws.
   C. Each day that any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   D. Any fines assessed under this Act shall be collected by the Municipal Court administration
      and paid over to the general fund, except for assessments of court costs.
(History: Ord. ROCR-2245 §9, 2001; NU-1382 §1, 86)




                                                                                                Page 8
7.04.310 Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this Chapter or any part thereof
is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this Chapter or any part thereof.
(History: Ord. NU-1382 §1, 86)




                                                                                               Page 9
TITLE 7 - HEALTH AND SANITATION

7.08 NOISE
Contents:
 7.08.001 Definitions.
 7.08.002 Unlawful to Cause a Noise Disturbance.
 7.08.003 Unlawful to Allow a Noise Disturbance; Responsibility for Abatement.
 7.08.004 Exemptions.
 7.08.005 Penalties.
 7.10.010 Incorporation.

7.08.001 Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this ordinance shall, for the purpose of this
ordinance, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section unless otherwise
defined in the text of the section.
Commercial Area– property zoned C-O, CP-O, C-1, CP-1, C-2, CP-2, C-3, CP-3, CBD, DD, Oxford
Township Districts CP-0J, CP-1J, CP-2J, CP-3J (per the March, 1982, Zoning and Subdivision
Regulations for Oxford Township), or property operating under a special use permit for a
commercial use.
dB(A)– A-weighted sound level measured in decibels by a general purpose, properly calibrated,
sound level meter complying with the provisions of the American National Standard Institute.
Emergency Motor Vehicle– a motor vehicle belonging to a fire department or certified private
volunteer firefighter or firefighting association, partnership or corporation, an ambulance, or a
motor vehicle belonging to a federal, state, county or municipal law enforcement agency, provided
such vehicle is being used as an emergency vehicle by one authorized to use such vehicle for that
purpose.
Industrial Area - property zoned BP, M-1, MP-1, M-2, MP-2, and Oxford Township Districts IP-1J
and IP-2J (per the March, 1982, Zoning and Subdivision Regulations for Oxford Township).
Plainly Audible– capable of being heard. It is not necessary to distinguish words or melodies. A
plainly audible sound may consist of bass alone.
Property Owner– the named property owner as indicated by the records of the Register of Deeds
or Appraiser’s Office in Johnson County, Kansas.
Residential Area– property zoned RE, R-1, RP-1, R-1A, RP-1A, R-2, RP-2, R-3, RP-3, RP-4, R-5, RP-
5, R-6, RP-6, former District R-4, and Oxford Township Districts RR, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3 and R-4
(per the March, 1982, Zoning and Subdivision Regulations for Oxford Township) or property upon
which a legal non-conforming residential use is operating.



                                                                                           Page 1
Sound Amplification or Producing Device or Similar Equipment– shall mean radio, radio
receiving set, television, phonograph, stereo, tape player, cassette player, compact disc player,
“boom box,” loudspeaker, drum, juke box, nickelodeon, musical instrument, sound amplifier or
other device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound.
Tenant– any person who has an interest in real property either by oral or written lease or
covenant.
(History: Ord. NOI-2287 §1, 2001)

7.08.002 Unlawful to Cause a Noise Disturbance.
It shall be unlawful to make or cause to be made a Noise Disturbance within the City. A Noise
Disturbance shall include any or all of the following:
   A. A sound registered on a decibel meter from any source not exempted or otherwise regulated
      by this Chapter and which, when measured anywhere off of the property of the sound source,
      is in excess of the dB(A) established for the time period and zones listed below.
       AREA                   7:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m.                  10:00 p.m. – 7:00 a.m.
Residential         60 dB(A)                                  55 dB(A)
Commercial          65 dB(A)                                  60 dB(A)
Industrial          70 dB(A)                                  65 dB(A)


   B. The owning, keeping or harboring of any animal that howls, barks or emits audible sounds,
      without provocation of the complainant, that are unreasonably loud or disturbing which are
      of such character, intensity and duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of a reasonable
      person in the neighborhood or to be detrimental to the life and health of any individual.
   C. A sound resulting from the erecting, constructing, excavating, demolishing, altering or
      repairing of any structure, or operating, or permitting the operation of any tools or
      equipment used in construction, drilling, or demolition work in such a manner as to cause a
      sound Plainly Audible across any property boundary line between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
      7:00 a.m. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., this activity shall not be subject to the
      time, area and dB(A) limits set forth in subsection A.
   D. The repairing, rebuilding, modifying or stationary testing of any motor vehicle, motorcycle,
      or motorboat in such a manner as to cause a sound Plainly Audible across any property
      boundary line between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
      and 10:00 p.m., this activity shall not be subject to the time, area and dB(A) limits set forth in
      subsection A.
   E. The operating or occupancy of a vehicle, which is moving or stationary, standing or parked,
      whether persons are seated in the vehicle or not, from which any Sound Amplification or
      Producing Device or Similar Equipment is creating a sound that is Plainly Audible at least
      fifty (50) feet from the source of the sound.* A violation of this subsection shall be a traffic
      offense.
   F. The operation of any power tool, garden tool, lawnmower, snow blower or other similar
      equipment or device in Residential Areas in such a manner as to cause a sound Plainly
      Audible across any property boundary line between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.




                                                                                                Page 2
      Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., this activity shall not be subject to the time,
      area and dB(A) limits set forth in subsection A.
   G. The operating, playing, permitting or causing to be operated or played any Sound
      Amplification or Producing Device or Similar Equipment in a manner as to cause a sound
      Plainly Audible across any property boundary line between the hours of 12:00 a.m.
      (midnight) and 6:00 a.m. Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight), this
      activity is subject to the area and dB(A) limits set forth in subsection A above.
*As to vehicle equipment and maintenance and prevention of excessive or unusual noise therefrom,
see OPMC 12.04.175(a).


(History: Ord. NOI-3051 §1, 2014; NOI-2772 §1, 2008; NOI-2373 §1, 2002; NOI-2287 §2, 2001)

7.08.003 Unlawful to Allow a Noise Disturbance; Responsibility for Abatement.
   A. It is unlawful for any Property Owner or Tenant, or other person with control, occupancy, or
      possession of residential property, to allow or permit a person or group of persons to create
      a Noise Disturbance as defined in subsections A through G of Overland Park Municipal Code
      Section 7.08.002 on said property.
   B. The Property Owner, Tenant or other such person with control, occupancy, or possession of
      property, shall be responsible for abatement of Noise Disturbances occurring on that
      property and failure to do so shall be a violation of this section.
(History: Ord. NOI-2310, §1, 2001; Ord. NOI-2287, §3, 2001)

7.08.004 Exemptions.
The following shall not be considered to be Noise Disturbances for purposes of this ordinance:
   A. Sound from law enforcement motor vehicles and other Emergency Motor Vehicles including,
      but not limited to, snow-clearing equipment.
   B. Sound from vehicles or equipment belonging to the city, state, county, federal government,
      school or other governmental agencies or utilities engaged in preparing for or remedying a
      potentially hazardous situation.
   C. Sound that a person is making or causing to be made when said person has received and
      maintains a valid license or permit which specifically allows sound levels in excess of those
      set forth in this ordinance from any department, board or commission of the City authorized
      to issue such license or permit.
   D. Sound originating from private property, provided that such property was annexed into the
      City by either Ordinance No. A-2367 or Ordinance No. A-2719.
(History: Ord. NOI-2696 §1, 2008; NOI-2402 §1, 2002; NOI-2373 §2, 2002; NOI-2291 §1, 2001; NOI-
2287 §4, 2001)

7.08.005 Penalties.
   A. Upon a first conviction for a violation of this chapter, the Court shall assess a fine of no less
      than fifty dollars ($50.00). Upon a second conviction, the Court shall assess a fine of no less



                                                                                               Page 3
       than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). Upon a third or subsequent conviction, the Court
       shall assess a fine of no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). No prior conviction
       shall be considered in determining the penalty to be assessed if twenty-four (24) months
       have elapsed between the date of the violation and the date of the conviction next
       immediately preceding the sentencing date.
    B. No person shall be eligible for a parole, suspension or reduction of any part of said fine
       except that that portion of any fine or combination of fines that exceeds two hundred dollars
       ($200.00) assessed from the same set of operative facts may be suspended for twelve (12)
       months on the condition the violator have no further violations of the noise ordinance during
       that period. In addition to any such fine imposed, the Court may impose a jail term of up to
       six (6) months.
    C. Each occurrence of a violation, or in the case of a continuous violation, each day a violation
       occurs or continues, constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
       hereunder.
(History: Ord. NOI-2287 §5, 2001)

7.10.010 Incorporation.
There is incorporated by reference, for the purpose of establishing minimum requirements for the
operation and maintenance of such pools, spas and similar facilities to minimize hazards to health
and safety of users of such facilities, comprehensive regulations entitled “Rules and Regulations
Relating to the Operation and Maintenance of Swimming Pools, Spas and Similar Facilities in the
City of Overland Park, Kansas,” dated November, 1997 and approved by the Community
Development Committee of the City Council on November 5, 1997; prepared, compiled, published
and promulgated by the City of Overland Park, Kansas, Health and Environment Division, in code
form as that term is defined in K.S.A. 12-3301 (c), such incorporation by reference being authorized
by K.S.A. 12-3009 to and including 12-3012. Not less than three (3) copies of said ordinance shall be
marked “official copy as adopted by Ordinance No. SPR-2081” to which shall be attached a copy of
the ordinance codified herein, and filed with the City Clerk to be opened to inspection and available
to the public at all reasonable business hours. The Municipal Court and all administrative
departments of the City charged with the enforcement of the ordinance shall be supplied at the cost
of the City such number of official copies of such ordinance as may be deemed expedient. The
Governing Body may set fees for inspection and licensing of regulated facilities by adoption of a
Resolution.
(History: Ord. SPR-2081 §1, 97; Ord. SPR-1980 §1, 96)




                                                                                             Page 4
TITLE 7 - HEALTH AND SANITATION

7.16 TREES AND SHRUBS
Contents:
 7.16.100 Purpose and Intent.
 7.16.110 Legacy of Greenery Committee.
 7.16.120 City Forester.
 7.16.130 Definitions.
 7.16.150 Tree and Shrub Distance and Clearance Requirements.
 7.16.180 Approved Street Tree List.
 7.16.190 Trees and Shrubs on Private Property.
 7.16.195 Trees and Shrubs on Public Property.
 7.16.200 Abutting Owner’s Duty to Right-of-way.
 7.16.205 Notice of Violation; Hearing; Notice to Appear.
 7.16.208 Abatement by City; Notice of Costs; Assessment and Collection.
 7.16.210 Penalties and Violation; Civil Actions.
 7.16.220 Exceptions and Other Regulations.

7.16.100 Purpose and Intent.
   A. Protect and encourage the protection and Maintenance of Trees and Shrubs.
   B. Promote and preserve the City's aesthetic value with respect to Trees and Shrubs.
   C. Regulate and control planting and Maintenance of Trees and Shrubs on and adjacent to
      private property, Right-of-way and other public properties.
   D. Provide for public health, safety and general welfare with respect to Trees and Shrubs.
   E. Establish the Legacy of the Greenery Committee as a tree board for the City.
   F. Designate a City Forester.
(History: Ord. TP-3025 §1, 2014; TP-2032 §1, 97; TP-1289 §1, 85)

7.16.110 Legacy of Greenery Committee.
   A. Creation.
      There is hereby created and established a tree board for the City to be known as the Legacy
      of Greenery Committee (hereinafter referred to as the "Committee").
   B. Purpose and Responsibility. The Committee shall be responsible for:




                                                                                          Page 1
       1. Developing strategies to increase, preserve and enhance the City’s Tree canopy by
          promoting, planting and maintaining Trees and Shrubs on both public and private
          property.
       2. The promotion and recognition of commercial developments, businesses, and public
          entities that have committed to improve and enhance the aesthetics and quality of our
          environment through landscape enhancements.
       3. Supporting the City Forester with programs and events that meet qualifications for
          National Arbor Day Foundation's Tree City USA status. This includes, but is not limited to,
          educational programs with the official mascot Forest the Fox, an Arbor Day tree planting
          ceremony and a tree seedling distribution.
       4. The advocacy and dissemination of information supporting proper arboricultural
          practices, topical concerns affecting the City's Trees, and other information recommended
          by the City Forester.
       5. The review and updating of the List of Approved Street Trees for Overland Park, in
          accordance with Section 7.16.180.
   C. Membership.
       1. The Committee shall consist of 13 members who are residents of the City and not less
          than 18 years of age, and 2 ex-officio members: 1 representing the Planning Commission,
          and 1 representing the City Council. (For a total of 15 Members.) All Members (including
          ex-officio) shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.
       2. Should any Committee member move outside the City, the Committee shall declare to the
          Mayor the existence of a vacancy.
       3. The appointments shall be made for two-year terms, plus until their successors take
          office; provided all vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Mayor with the consent
          of the City Council for the unexpired term.
       4. Committee members shall serve on a volunteer basis without compensation from the City
          or any other organization, trust, donation, or legacy for their services to the City.
       5. The Committee shall adopt by-laws consistent with the City Council’s Rules, Procedures
          and Protocol for Plural Authorities.
       6. The Committee shall elect from its membership a chair and vice-chair, who shall serve one
          year and until their successors have been selected. Duties and responsibilities of these
          offices shall be stipulated in the by-laws of the Committee.
   D. Staffing. The City Forester shall serve as the staff coordinator for the Committee.
(History: Ord. TP-3363 §1, 2022; Ord. TP-3025 §2, 2014; TP-1289 §2, 85)

7.16.120 City Forester.
A City Forester shall be appointed by the City Manager to serve as the designated City official to
observe and enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
(History: Ord. TP-3025 §3, 2014; TP-2032 §2, 97; TP-1289 §3, 85)

7.16.130 Definitions.




                                                                                             Page 2
For purposes of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply to the listed terms:
    A. City Forester– means the City official designated in Section 7.16.120 to observe and enforce
       the provisions of this Chapter. All references to the City Forester shall include the City
       Forester’s designee(s).
    B. Community Services Division– means the City office designated by the City Manager to
       perform the duties specified in this Chapter. All references to the Community Services
       Division shall include the Community Services Division’s designee(s), including but not
       limited to, the City Forester or any City contractor.
    C. Landscape Improvements– means, for the purposes of this Chapter, landscape and
       hardscape outdoor improvements including, but not be limited to, retaining walls, statues,
       and decorative boulders.
   D. Maintenance- means, without limitation, the protecting, spraying, fertilizing, treating,
      pruning, abatement of infestation and trimming of Trees or Shrubs.
    E. Nuisance– means the doing of an act, failure to perform a legal duty, or the allowance or
       creation of a condition which injures, endangers, hinders or unreasonably interferes with the
       public health, safety or welfare in the use and enjoyment of Right-of-way or other public
       property by the general public. Examples include, but are not limited to, brush and
       limbs, Trees and Shrubs which are dead, diseased or infested which present a harmful or
       dangerous condition to the public, and encroachments of Trees and Shrubs in the Right-of-
       way or other public property which create a safety hazard.
    F. Owner– means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable
       interest in the (real) property; or recorded in the official records of the Johnson County
       Register of Deeds office as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the
       property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or
       administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
       court.
        1. Abutting Owner – means an Owner that directly abuts the Right-of-way where
           the Tree or Shrub requiring Maintenance or removal is located.
    G. Right-of-way– means the area on, below or above the present and future City Streets,
       alleys, bridges, bikeways, parkways and sidewalks.
   H. Shrub– means a low, usually several-stemmed, woody plant. For the purposes of this
      Chapter, it shall also include ornamental and native grasses used in place of Shrubs.
    I. Street– means the pavement and sub-grade of a City residential, collector or arterial
       roadway.
    J. Tree– means a woody plant having a well-defined stem or trunk, a more or less definite
       crown, a height at maturity of at least eight feet, and the trunk diameter exceeds two inches.
        1. Large Trees - Trees with a potential mature height of 50 feet or more.
        2. Medium Trees - Trees with a potential mature height between 25 to 50 feet.
        3. Small Trees - Trees with a potential mature height of no more than 25 feet.
        4. Street Trees - Trees located within the Right-of-way.
(History: Ord. TP-3025 §4, 2014; TP-2032 §3, 97; TP-1289 §4, 85)




                                                                                             Page 3
7.16.150 Tree and Shrub Distance and Clearance Requirements.
   A. No Tree or Shrub shall be planted in the Right-of-way within a distance of:
       1. 10 feet of any fireplug
       2. 15 feet of any regulatory sign
       3. 20 feet of any street light pole
       4. 10 feet of any box culvert
   B. The minimum height clearances for Trees and Shrubs are:
       1. 8 feet over public sidewalks
       2. 13.5 feet over improved thoroughfares or designated truck routes
       3. 12.5 feet over all other Streets
   C. No Tree or Shrub shall be planted or maintained in the Right-of-way within any zone of
      approach, meaning, the area allowing an unobstructed view in advance of an actual or
      possible future traffic control device for a distance of 150 feet as measured from the point of
      the nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines of the Right-of-way.
   D. The sight distance areas, as defined in OPMC Sections 12.04.126 and 18.450.070, shall remain
      free of Shrubs, Landscape Improvements or other vegetation which exceed a height of 2 feet
      measured from the Street. Trees in this area must be approved by the City Forester.
   E. No Trees, Shrubs or Landscape Improvements over 2 feet in height will be permitted on
      residential traffic islands or thoroughfare Right-of-way unless approved by the City Forester.
   F. Only Small Tree species, as designated in accordance with Section 7.16.180, may be planted
      or maintained within any portion of Right-of-way with overhead electric lines.
   G. No Tree or Shrub shall be planted or maintained in a location that in any manner creates a
      Nuisance.
(History: Ord. TP-3025 §5, 2014; TP-1866 §1, 94; TP-1784 §1, 93; TP-1289 §6, 85)

7.16.180 Approved Street Tree List.
Street Tree species allowed to be planted and grown within the Right-of-way will be set forth on the
List of Approved Street Trees for Overland Park. This list will be made readily available through the
City Forester and on the City’s web site and it can be mailed upon request. This list will be reviewed
and updated by the Legacy of Greenery Committee at least every three (3) years to reflect changes
found in arboricultural practices. The planting of any species not on this list, shall be prohibited
unless prior written authorization of the City Forester is obtained; and the City Forester is
authorized to adopt regulations providing procedures and criteria for the approval of species not
on this List.
(History: Ord. TP-3025 §6, 2014; TP-2732 §1, 2008; TP-2032 §5, 97; TP-1289 §9, 85)

7.16.190 Trees and Shrubs on Private Property.
    A. Authority. The Community Services Division shall have the authority to regulate and enforce
       all regulations concerning the Maintenance and removal of Trees and Shrubs on private
       property. The City Forester shall assist the Community Services Division as necessary.




                                                                                              Page 4
   B. Maintenance or Removal. Whenever the Community Services Division or the City Forester
      determines that any Tree or Shrub on private property endangers, hinders or obstructs the
      use of public or private property, is a Nuisance, or in any other way endangers the public
      health, safety and welfare, the Community Services Division shall issue a notice of violation to
      order the Maintenance or removal of the Tree or Shrub by the Owner. (See Sections 7.16.205
      and 7.16.208.)
   C. Emergency Action. In the event the Community Services Division or the City Forester
      determines that the existing condition of any Tree or Shrub on private property constitutes
      an immediate hazard to the public health, safety and welfare or otherwise endangers persons
      or property, then the City shall proceed, without delay, to take steps to abate the situation
      and without prior notice to or hearing of the Owner, occupant or agent. The cost of such
      action shall be assessed as set forth in O.P.M.C. Chapter 7.28 as amended, or pursuant to
      K.S.A. 12-1,115, as amended, or both.
   D. Right to Inspect. The Community Services Division and the City Forester are hereby
      authorized to enter on private property for the purpose of inspecting Trees or Shrubs where
      there appears to be a Nuisance or a threat to public or private property or to the public,
      health, safety and welfare. This entry and inspection may be done without the prior
      permission of the Owner, occupant or agent if the threat is imminent and if such notification
      is not feasible under the circumstances. If any person prevents such entry and inspection, the
      City may seek an appropriate court order to make such entry and inspection possible.
(History: Ord. TP-3025 §7, 2014; TP-2032 §7, 97; TP-1289 §11, 85)

7.16.195 Trees and Shrubs on Public Property.
   A. Authority. The City Forester shall have the authority to regulate and enforce all regulations
      concerning the planting, Maintenance and removal of Trees and Shrubs on public property.
   B. Maintenance.
       1. Whenever the City Forester determines that Maintenance of any Trees or Shrubs located
          in any Right-of-way is necessary, the City Forester shall follow the procedures set forth in
          Section 7.16.200. Notwithstanding, the City shall always maintain the right to perform any
          necessary Maintenance of any Tree or Shrub in Right-of-way and the City Forester may at
          anytime, in the City Forester’s discretion, direct city staff or the City’s contractor to
          perform the Maintenance.
       2. Whenever the City Forester determines that Maintenance of any Trees or Shrubs located
          in any public property other than Right-of-way is necessary, the City Forester shall direct
          city staff or the City’s contractor to perform the Maintenance. Notice to any Abutting
          Owner is not required.
   C. Removal.
       1. Whenever the City Forester determines that removal of any Shrubs located in any Right-
          of-way is necessary, the City Forester shall follow the procedures set forth in Section
          7.16.200. Notwithstanding, the City shall always maintain the right to perform any
          necessary removal of any Shrub in Right-of-way and the City Forester may at anytime, in
          the City Forester’s discretion, direct city staff or the City’s contractor to perform the
          removal.




                                                                                              Page 5
       2. Whenever the City Forester determines that removal of any Tree in Right-of-way is
          necessary, the City Forester shall direct city staff or the City’s contractor to perform the
          removal. Notice to any Abutting Owner is not required.
       3. Whenever the City Forester determines that removal of any Tree or Shrub on any public
          property other than Right-of-way is necessary, the City Forester shall direct city staff or
          the City’s contractor to perform the removal. Notice to any Abutting Owner is not
          required.
(History: Ord. TP-3025 §8, 2014; TP-2032 §8, 97)

7.16.200 Abutting Owner’s Duty to Right-of-way.
   A. Duty. Abutting Owners are responsible for Maintaining the Trees and Shrubs within or
      encroaching within the abutting Right-of-way in a manner which promotes safe and healthy
      Trees and Shrubs and which protects the health, safety, and welfare of the public with
      respect to the same. The Abutting Property Owners shall not allow such Trees and Shrubs to
      hinder or obstruct the Right-of-way, create a Nuisance, or threaten life or property within the
      Right-of-way. When applicable, this duty shall also include the responsibility to remove
      Shrubs within the abutting Right-of-way. Whenever the Community Services Division or the
      City Forester determines that any such Tree or Shrub endangers, hinders or obstructs the use
      of the Right-of-way, is a Nuisance, or in any other way endangers the public health, safety and
      welfare, the Community Services Division shall issue a notice of violation to order the
      Maintenance of the Tree or Shrub by the Owner. (See Sections 7.16.205 and 7.16.208.)
   B. City Assistance. An Abutting Owner may contact the City Forester to request the City’s
      assistance with the removal of a diseased, hazardous, or dead Tree in the Right-of-way.
      Diseased Trees are those diagnosed by the City Forester as having a highly contagious
      disease that could have catastrophic effects upon the City’s Trees. An Abutting Owner may
      also request the City’s assistance with the removal of storm damage from Right-of-way Trees
      to ensure that the Right-of-way is kept clear for vehicular and pedestrian traffic and that
      public safety, health and welfare is maintained.
(History: Ord. TP-3025 §9, 2014; TP-2032 §9, 97; TP-1289 §12, 85)

7.16.205 Notice of Violation; Hearing; Notice to Appear.
   A. A notice of violation issued pursuant to Section 7.16.190 B. or Section 7.16.200 A. shall be
      sent to the Owner, occupant or agent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by
      personal service. If the property is unoccupied and the Owner is a nonresident of Kansas, the
      notice of violation shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
      address of the Owner.
   B. The notice of violation shall state:
       1. The common or legal description of the property, or both;
       2. That the property is in violation of this Chapter;
       3. A description of the violation that would reasonably allow the Owner, occupant or agent
          to determine the nature of the violation to allow for self-abatement;
       4. That the violation must be abated by the Owner, occupant or agent within 10 days from
          the date of the notice of violation, provided that extensions of the time period shall be




                                                                                              Page 6
          granted if the Owner, occupant or agent demonstrates that due diligence is being
          exercised in abating the violation;
       5. That prior to the expiration of the notice period, the Owner, occupant or agent may
          request in writing a hearing before the hearing officer;
       6. That failure to comply with the notice of violation shall result in the City abating the
          violation, with the assessment of costs (including a reasonable administrative fee and the
          cost of all notice) made against the property and the Owner, occupant or agent;
       7. That failure to pay such assessments within 30 days of the notice of costs shall result in
          the filing of a tax lien against the property or by filing for a personal judgment against the
          recipient, or both; and
       8. That separate and independent of any abatement of the violation by the City, such
          violation is subject to prosecution in the Overland Park Municipal Court.
   C. If the recipient of the notice of violation makes a written request for hearing within the notice
      period, then the City shall immediate schedule a hearing before a designated hearing officer.
      The hearing officer shall receive evidence, review the investigation, and prepare a written
      order. The order shall be sent to all relevant parties within 10 days of the hearing, unless
      otherwise stated at the hearing and prior to the City taking any action to abate the violation.
      The order shall state the relevant facts and the specific Code provisions relied upon, and any
      other stipulations, methods of abatement, or orders as deemed necessary by the hearing
      officer.
   D. If an authorized public officer determines that a violation of this Chapter exists, the public
      officer may issue a Notice to Appear in Municipal Court for such violation. Such prosecution
      shall be separate and independent of any abatement action, and no other procedures are
      required as a prerequisite to the issuance of a Notice to Appear.
(History: Ord. TP-3025 §10, 2014)

7.16.208 Abatement by City; Notice of Costs; Assessment and Collection.
   A. If the Owner, occupant or agent fails to request a hearing and to self-abate the violation
      within the notice period, then the City may go onto the property to abate the violation in a
      reasonable manner. The City shall not be responsible for damage to property due to
      reasonable methods of gaining entrance onto the property or for damages to property in the
      reasonable exercise of its duty to abate the violation. The City may use its own employees or
      contract for services to abate the violation.
   B. If the City abates the violation, it shall provide a notice of costs to the Owner, occupant or
      agent by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the last known mailing address. If the
      property is vacant or unoccupied, the notice of costs shall also be posted on the property in a
      reasonable manner. The notice of costs shall state:
       1. The common or legal description of the property, or both;
       2. The nature of the violation, including relevant ordinances;
       3. The nature of the work performed to abate the violation;
       4. The costs incurred for the abatement in either a lump sum or in itemized form;
       5. That the notice of costs is a demand for payment within 30 days from the date of the
          notice;




                                                                                                Page 7
       6. That failure to pay the entire amount within 30 days shall allow the City to file a tax lien
          against the property or to pursue litigation for the recovery of the costs, or both;
       7. That such additional remedies to recover costs shall include additional amounts including
          additional administrative costs, attorneys' fees, and interest;
       8. That payments shall be made by check or money order made payable to the City, with no
          post-dating of the check, and sent to the address stated within the notice of costs, with a
          written indication of the purpose for the payment and the address of the property where
          the violations occurred. (If the City offers payment by credit card, that information may
          also be provided.) Partial payments will not be accepted and shall be considered as non-
          payments.
   C. If the payment of costs is not made within the thirty (30) day period, the City may file an
      affidavit of pending action with the Johnson County, Kansas Department of Records and Tax
      Administration with respect to the aforesaid costs. In addition, the City Clerk shall certify the
      aforesaid costs at the time of certifying other City taxes to the County Clerk, and the County
      Clerk shall extend the same on the tax roll of the County against the property, and it shall be
      collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the City as other City taxes are collected and
      paid. Provided further, the City may collect the costs in the manner provided at K.S.A. 12-
      1,115, as may be amended, by bringing an action in the appropriate court as a personal debt.
      The City may pursue both assessment and collection at the same time until the full cost,
      including applicable interests, court costs, attorneys' fees, and administrative costs have been
      paid in full.
(History: Ord. TP-3025 §11, 2014)

7.16.210 Penalties and Violation; Civil Actions.
   A. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or otherwise maintain Trees or Shrubs in an area
      where such planting or Maintenance is prohibited by this Chapter.
   B. It shall be unlawful for any person, including an Abutting Owner, to abuse, damage, mutilate,
      destroy or remove without the prior written permission from the City Forester (i) any Street
      Tree, (ii) any Shrub in the Right-of-way that was planted or is maintained by the City, or (iii)
      any Tree or Shrub on any other public property. Persons in violation of this provision shall be
      required to provide a replacement Tree or Shrub of a species and caliper approved by the
      City Forester; provided, however, the City Forester may waive this requirement in the City
      Forester’s sole discretion.
   C. It shall be unlawful for any Owner, occupant or agent to permit any Tree or Shrub on their
      property to remain in violation of this Chapter after receipt of a notice of violation from the
      Community Services Division or the City Forester.
   D. It shall be unlawful for any Owner, occupant or agent to allow any Tree or Shrub to hinder or
      obstruct any Right-of-way abutting their property or to violate any minimum distance or
      clearance requirements.
   E. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or otherwise interfere with authorized
      employees, officials or contractors of the City in the performance of their official duties
      pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
   F. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a public offense and
      upon conviction shall be punished as provided in OPMC Section 1.12.010.



                                                                                               Page 8
   G. The City may further enforce this Chapter by filing an action in the appropriate court for an
      injunction to enforce the provisions of this Chapter; to cause correction of any such violation;
      for assessment and recovery of a civil penalty for such violation; or to pursue any other
      appropriate civil remedy.
(History: Ord. (History: Ord. TP-3025 §12, 2014; TP-2032 §10, 97; TP-1289 §13, 85)

7.16.220 Exceptions and Other Regulations.
   A. Sections 7.16.150 A., 7.16.150 F. and 7.16.180 shall not affect Trees or Shrubs planted prior
      to the earliest effective date of the applicable prohibitions contained therein. The judgment of
      the City Forester concerning the planting date of the object at issue shall be entitled to a
      presumption of correctness that may be rebutted by credible evidence. Any replacement or
      additional plantings after such earliest effective date shall be in full compliance with all
      applicable provisions of the Overland Park Municipal Code.
   B. The provisions contained in this Chapter are supplementary to and are not intended to
      exempt or interfere with the duties, responsibilities, enforcement or interpretation of any
      other ordinance or law concerning property maintenance, Right-of-way or the removal of
      vegetation, including, but not limited to, weeds, woody vines, brush, grass and uncultivated
      plants listed in Chapter 7.20 of the Overland Park Municipal Code.
(History: Ord. TP-3025 §13, 2014; TP-2032 §11, 97; TP-1289 §14, 85)




                                                                                              Page 9
TITLE 7 - HEALTH AND SANITATION

7.20 WEEDS
Contents:
 7.20.100 Title.
 7.20.110 Purpose, Objectives, and Findings.
 7.20.120 Definitions.
 7.20.130 Violations; Responsibility to Abate.
 7.20.140 Public Officer; Notice of Violation; Hearing.
 7.20.150 Abatement by City; Notice of Costs; Assessment and Collection.
 7.20.160 Reserved.
 7.20.170 Right of Entry; Unlawful Interference.
 7.20.180 Penalty.
 7.20.190 Exceptions.
 7.20.200 Severability.
 7.20.210 Title; Definitions; Applicability of Other Provisions. (Expired)
 7.20.220 Excessive Growth Unlawful; Responsibility to Abate. (Expired)
 7.20.230 Notice. (Expired)
 7.20.240 Notice of Abatement; Hearing; Designated Officer. (Expired)
 7.20.250 Abatement; Assessment of Costs. (Expired)
 7.20.260 Expiration Date. (Expired)

7.20.100 Title.
Overland Park Municipal Code Sections 7.20.100 through 7.20.200, inclusive shall be known as
the Weed and Vegetation Enforcement Act.
(History: Ord. NU-2939 §1, 2011; NU-1376 §1, 86)

7.20.110 Purpose, Objectives, and Findings.
   A. The purpose of the Weed and Vegetation Enforcement Act is to:
       1. Prohibit the growth of Noxious Weeds, Uncontrolled growth of Invasive Species, and
          encourage the preservation, planting, and maintenance of Native Plants;
       2. Require reasonable Control and action to:
             a. Prevent the Excessive Growth of Vegetation;
             b. Eradicate Noxious Weeds;




                                                                                     Page 1
               c. Eradicate Poisonous Plants to the Touch; and
               d. Prevent the growth of Invasive Plants that are not properly Controlled.
        3. Provide a method of enforcement of violations of this Chapter;
        4. Provide procedures to notify the Owner, Occupant or Agent of the property that a
           violation of this Chapter exists and to allow for self-abatement by such Persons;
        5. Provide the Owner, Occupant or Agent an opportunity to be heard concerning violations
           of this Chapter;
        6. Provide procedures to allow the City to abate the violation should the Owner, Occupant or
           Agent fail to timely act;
        7. Provide a method of assessing or collecting costs for such abatement by the City; and
        8. Establish that violations of this Chapter are unlawful and to provide penalties for
           enforcement through the Municipal Court system.
    B. The objectives of the Weed and Vegetation Enforcement Act are to:
        1. To enhance the City's environmental health by promoting plants that are native to the
           region;
        2. To protect the City’s environmental health by prohibiting plants that are likely to cause
           environmental harm or harm to human health;
        3. To require control and action to prevent the Excessive Growth of Vegetation, eradicate
           Noxious Weeds, and Poisonous Plants to the Touch, and prevent the spread of Invasive
           Plants.
    C. The Governing Body hereby finds that:
        1. Excessive Growth of Vegetation;
        2. Noxious Weeds;
        3. Poisonous Plants to the Touch; and
        4. The growth of Invasive Plants are all a public nuisance that degrade natural and
           maintained landscape areas, displace native plant species, increase erosion, destroy
           wildlife habitat, and/or adversely affect public health, safety or welfare; and that allowing
           them to proliferate creates short- and long-term impacts on the area including the
           diminution of property values and the integrity of the neighborhood; and interferes with
           the orderly development and use of property in the City.
(History: Ord. NU-3437 §1, 2023; Ord. NU-2939 §2, 2011; NU-1376 §1, 86)

7.20.120 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
    A. Agent shall mean any Person listed in the Johnson County, Kansas, Appraiser’s office or
       Treasurer’s office for the purposes of paying taxes; a registered agent with the Kansas
       Secretary of State’s office for corporate or partnership ownership; an agent, administrator,
       executor, or manager directed by the Owner, estate, or court order to represent the interests
       of real property or to otherwise maintain, care or control activities on the property; or
       corporate officer.
    B. City shall mean the City of Overland Park, Kansas.




                                                                                                Page 2
   C. Control or Controlled shall mean the planned and intentional planting, trimming and
      cultivation of vegetation, including, but not limited to, the prevention of the unintended and
      uncultivated production of viable seed or the vegetative spread of a plant.
   D. Excessive Growth of Vegetation shall mean any grasses, dandelions, herbaceous plants
      or vines or other uncontrolled or uncultivated vegetation that is more than eight (8”) inches
      in height above the ground or in length if matted down as measured along the stem. The
      abatement of Excessive Growth of Vegetation may include trees, bushes, shrubs, flowers, and
      ornamental or garden plants, either cultivated or uncultivated, if such vegetation is not made
      readily distinguishable from any Excessive Growth of Vegetation.
   E. Invasive Plants shall mean species, including its seeds, spores, or other biological material
      capable of propagating that species, that is not native to that ecosystem; and whose presence
      causes or is likely to cause harm to the environment, economy, and/or human health. These
      species often grow, reproduce, and spread rapidly. Invasive Plants shall include bamboo. Said
      plants are only allowed when properly Controlled.
   F. Native Plants shall mean vegetation that has evolved and naturally occurs in the region
      including native grasses, herbaceous plants, vines, shrubs, or trees.
   G. Noxious Weeds shall mean plants listed as Category A, Category B or Category C noxious
      weed in Kansas Administrative Regulations Section 4-8-44 (effective March 26, 2021),
      entitled “Designation Noxious Weeds” or listed as a noxious weed in 2 CSR 70-45.005 entitled
      “Noxious Weed List” of the Missouri Register, Vol. 48, No. 16, August 15, 2023.
   H. Occupant shall mean any Person who has a severable or nonseverable interest in real
      property either by oral or written lease or covenant, or by other methods of conveying a
      limited interest in such property; or any Person who occupies or has possession of such
      property.
    I. Owner shall mean the named property owner as indicated by the records of the Records and
       Tax Administration or Appraiser’s office in Johnson County, Kansas.
    J. Person shall mean any individual, individuals, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
       association, other business organization, committee, board, trustee, receiver, or Agent.
   K. Planned Sustainable Landscape shall mean a planned, intentional, and maintained
      planting of primarily native plants, grasses, vines, shrubs, or trees, including but not limited
      to rain gardens, meadow vegetation, and ornamental plants. Planned Sustainable Landscapes
      do not include turf grass lawns left unattended for the purpose of returning to a natural state.
   L. Poisonous Plants to the Touch shall mean any plants at any height or state of maturity
      which are poisonous to the touch, including, but not limited to, poison ivy, poison oak and
      poison sumac.
(History: Ord. NU-3437 §2, 2023; Ord. NU-2939 §3, 2011; NU-1376 §1, 86)

7.20.130 Violations; Responsibility to Abate.
   A. It shall be unlawful for any Owner, Occupant or Agent of property to allow on said property
      any:
      1. Excessive Growth of Vegetation;
      2. Noxious Weeds;



                                                                                              Page 3
      3. Poisonous Plants to the Touch; or
      4. Invasive Plants that are not properly Controlled.
      Such prohibition shall include any areas between the property lines of said property and the
      center line of any adjacent street or alley, including, but not specifically limited to, sidewalks,
      streets, alleys, easements and rights-of-way. Any violation of this Section is hereby declared a
      nuisance, and is subject to abatement and prosecution as hereinafter provided.
   B. The Owner, Occupant or Agent shall be responsible for the abatement of any violation of this
      Section. Further, it is the responsibility of the Owner, Occupant or Agent to clearly mark,
      stake out, or otherwise distinguish between trees, bushes, shrubs, flowers, and ornamental or
      garden plants, or any Controlled Invasive Plants, as compared to any Excessive Growth of
      Vegetation, any Noxious Weeds, any Poisonous Plants to the Touch, or any uncontrolled
      growth of Invasive Plants in the surrounding area.
   C. Vegetation which constitutes one of the following shall not be deemed a violation under A.1.
      of this Section:
       1. Planned Sustainable Landscape,
       2. Controlled ornamental or food producing garden;

      Provided such vegetation does not encroach on adjacent property.


(History: Ord. NU-2939 §4, 2011; NU-1376 §1, 86)

7.20.140 Public Officer; Notice of Violation; Hearing.
   A. The City Manager shall designate a public officer(s) to administer and enforce this Chapter. If
      it is determined that a violation of this Chapter exists, the public officer shall file a written
      report with the City, and shall direct that a notice of violation be sent to the Owner, Occupant
      or Agent of the property; provided, however, if a violation was previously issued within the
      same calendar year of the violation, no further notice is required prior to any abatement
      action by the City.
   B. The notice of violation shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal
      service. If the property is unoccupied and the Owner is a nonresident, such notice shall be
      sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the Owner. In
      cases where the Owner is unknown or is a nonresident, and there is no resident agent, then
      the City Clerk shall publish the notice of the violation in the official City newspaper.
   C. The notice of violation shall state:
      1. A common or legal description of the property where the violation exists;
      2. That the property is in violation of the Weed and Vegetation Enforcement Act;
      3. A description of the violation that would reasonably allow the Owner, Occupant or Agent to
      determine the nature of the violation to allow for self-abatement;




                                                                                                 Page 4
     4. That the violation must be abated by the Owner, Occupant or Agent within ten (10) days
     from the date of the mailing of the notice of violation; or within ten (10) days of publication if
     publication was deemed necessary;
     5. That, prior to the expiration of the notice period, the Owner, Occupant or Agent may
     request in writing a hearing before the hearing officer;
     6. That the failure to comply with the notice of violation shall result in the City abating the
     violation, with the assessment of costs of abatement (including a reasonable administrative
     fee and the cost of all notice) made against the property and the Owner, Occupant or Agent;
     7. That payment of the assessment of costs is due and payable within thirty (30) days of the
     notice of assessment, or the assessment will be added to the property tax as a special
     assessment, as provided for by K.S.A. 12-1617e, as may be amended. And further, the City
     may also pursue collection by seeking a personal judgment against the Owner, Occupant or
     Agent in Johnson County District Court, as provided for by K.S.A. 12-1,115, as may be
     amended;
     8. That no further notice is required to be given by the City prior to the abatement of any
     additional violations on the property for one (1) year from the date of the notice of violation,
     and that any additional costs will be assessed in the same manner.
     9. That separate from and independent of any abatement of the violation by the City, such
     violations are also subject to prosecution in the Overland Park Municipal Court.
   D. If the recipient of the notice of violation makes a written request for a hearing within the
      notice period, the City shall schedule a hearing during a regular business day within ten (10)
      calendar days from the receipt of the request. The hearing shall be conducted by a designated
      hearing officer who is not a subordinate of the public officer who issued the notice of
      violation or conducted the investigation. The hearing officer shall receive evidence, review
      the investigation, and prepare a written order. The order shall be sent to all relevant parties
      within ten (10) days of the hearing, unless otherwise stated at the hearing, and prior to the
      City taking any action to abate the violation. The order shall state the relevant facts and the
      specific code provisions relied upon, and any other stipulations, methods of abatement, or
      orders as deemed necessary by the hearing officer.
   E. If the public officer determines that a violation of this Chapter exists, the public officer may
      issue a Notice to Appear in Municipal Court for such violation. Such prosecution shall be
      separate and independent of any abatement action, and no other procedures are required as
      a prerequisite to the issuance of a Notice to Appear.
(History: Ord. NU-3437 §4, 2023; Ord. NU-2939 §5, 2011; NU-2042 § 1, 97; NU-2033 § 1, 97; NU-
1376 §1, 86)

7.20.150 Abatement by City; Notice of Costs; Assessment and Collection.
   A. If the Owner, Occupant or Agent fails to request a hearing and or fails to self-abate the
      violation within the notice period, the City may enter onto the property to abate the violation
      in a reasonable manner. The City shall not be responsible for damage to property due to
      reasonable methods of gaining entrance onto the property, or for damages to property in the
      reasonable exercise of its duty to abate the violation. The City may use its own employees or
      contract for services to abate the violation. Any authorized officer or agent of the City may



                                                                                               Page 5
      relocate or remove any trash, debris, limbs or brush, building materials or other such items if
      such relocation or removal is reasonably necessary to abate the violation.
   B. If the City abates the violation, it shall provide a notice of costs to the Owner, Occupant or
      Agent by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the last known mailing address. If the
      property is vacant or unoccupied, the notice of costs shall also be posted on the property in a
      reasonable manner. The notice of costs shall state:
      1. The common or legal description of the property, or both;
      2. The nature of the violation, including relevant ordinances;
      3. The nature of the work performed to abate the violation;
      4. The costs incurred for the abatement of the violations in either a lump sum or in itemized
      form;
      5. That the notice is a demand for payment within thirty (30) days from the date of the
      notice;
      6. That failure to pay the entire amount within thirty (30) days shall allow the City to file a tax
      lien against the property or to pursue litigation for the recovery of the costs, or both;
      7. That such additional remedies to recover costs shall include additional amounts including
      additional administrative costs, attorneys' fees when applicable, and interest; and
      8. That payments shall be made by check or money order made payable to the City, with no
      post-dating of the check, and sent to the address stated within the notice, with a written
      indication of the purpose for the payment and the address of the property where the
      violations occurred. Partial payments will not be accepted and shall be considered as non-
      payments.
   C. If the payment of costs is not made within the thirty (30) day period, the City may file an
      affidavit of pending action with the Johnson County, Kansas Department of Records and Tax
      Administration with respect to the aforesaid costs. In addition, the City Clerk shall certify the
      aforesaid costs at the time of certifying other City taxes to the County Clerk, and the County
      Clerk shall extend the same on the tax roll of the County against the property, and it shall be
      collected by the County Treasurer and paid to the City as other City taxes are collected and
      paid.
      Provided further, the City may collect the costs in the manner provided at K.S.A. 12-1,115, as
      may be amended, by bringing an action in the appropriate court as a personal debt.
      The City may pursue both assessment and collection at the same time until the full cost,
      including applicable interests, court costs, attorneys’ fees, and administrative costs have been
      paid in full (Ref. K.S.A. 12-1617f, as may be amended).
(History: Ord. NU-3437 §5, 2023; Ord. NU-2939 §6, 2011; NU-1376 §1, 86)

7.20.160 Reserved.
Reserved.
(History: Ord. NU-3437 §6, 2023; Ord. NU-2939 §7, 2011; NU-1376 §1, 86)




                                                                                                 Page 6
7.20.170 Right of Entry; Unlawful Interference.
   A. Any authorized officer or agent of the City, pursuant to this Chapter, shall be allowed to enter
      onto any property within the City limits to investigate violations of this Chapter or for the
      abatement of violations pursuant to this Chapter.
   B. It shall be unlawful for any Person to interfere with a public officer or agent of the City in
      performing his or her duties pursuant to this Chapter whether investigating or abating
      violations.
   C. Any Person who interferes with an officer or agent of the City pursuant to this Chapter shall
      be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this Code.
(History: Ord. NU-2939 §8, 2011; NU-1376 §1, 86)

7.20.180 Penalty.
   A. Any Owner, Occupant or Agent in violation of this Chapter shall be subject to prosecution in
      the Overland Park Municipal Court. Any Person found guilty of violating the provisions of this
      Chapter shall be subject to a fine up to $500.00 and not more than ten (10) days in jail, or
      both a fine and jail sentence. Any Person found guilty of this Chapter two (2) or more times
      within any one-year period shall be fined not less than $250.00 nor more than $500.00 and
      shall be subject to a sentence not to exceed ten (10) days in jail, or both a fine and a jail
      sentence.
   B. Prosecution of any offender under this Chapter does not limit the City’s right to pursue
      assessment or collection of costs as stated in this Chapter, or by other laws.
   C. Each day that any violation of this Chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(History: Ord. NU-3437 §7, 2023; Ord. NU-2939 §9, 2011; NU-1376 §1, 86)

7.20.190 Exceptions.
This Chapter shall not be made applicable to:
   A. Land zoned where agricultural uses are a permitted use if such tract is one (1) contiguous
      tract, not intersected by any public roadway and is greater than twenty (20) acres if
      undeveloped and contiguous to other such undeveloped tracts where the total acreage of all
      undeveloped tracts exceeds twenty (20) acres;
   B. Undeveloped tracts of land zoned where agricultural uses are not a permitted use if such
      tract is one (1) contiguous tract, not intersected by any public roadways and is greater than
      twenty (20) acres;
   C. For the tracts of land identified in subsections A and B:
       1. Such tracts shall not allow any Excessive Growth of Vegetation and/or growth of
          agricultural crops within thirty (30) feet of the edge of the street or curb adjacent to any
          other roadway or the property line of any property being used for residential or
          commercial purposes.
       2. For tracts zoned other than for agricultural uses, where the City determines that any
          Excessive Growth of Vegetation creates or enhances an identifiable health or safety




                                                                                              Page 7
          problem, the procedures shall be followed as provided in this Chapter for the abatement
          of such Excessive Growth of Vegetation.
   D. Public parks, public golf courses, public natural preservation areas, public open space, public
      wildlife preservation areas, designated stream corridor areas, inaccessible public creek areas,
      and stormwater treatment facilities utilizing native vegetation as required by Chapter 16.210
      of this Code (as may be amended); provided, however, where the City determines that any
      Excessive Growth of Vegetation in such areas creates or enhances an identifiable health or
      safety problem, the City shall take such action as it deems necessary to mitigate such
      problem, consistent with the public interest in maintaining and protecting such areas.
   E. Planned Sustainable Landscape areas that meet the following criteria:
       1. The owner is responsible for ensuring that all landscape material in a Planned Sustainable
          Landscape is maintained in a healthy condition and managed so as not to include
          unintended vegetation.
       2. The Planned Sustainable Landscape cannot contain Invasive Plants which are not
          Controlled, turf grass, or any Noxious Weeds.
       3. The landscape boundaries are clearly defined through edging or containment and no
          vegetation is encroaching onto a neighboring property.
       4. The Planned Sustainable Landscape meets the following setback requirements:
              a. Three feet from side and/or rear lot lines running the length of the property
             b. No setback is required on side or rear lot lines where the defined landscape area
                 abuts another similar private or public landscape area, or if a solid fence at least four
                 feet in height is installed along the lot line adjoining the planned landscape
   F. Any tract or combination of tracts as determined by the Director of Planning and
      Development Services, or his or her designee, to meet the intent of the exceptions identified
      in subsections A-D.
(History: Ord. NU-3437 §8, 2023; Ord. NU-2939 §10, 2011; NU-2667 § 1, 2008; NU-2389 § 1, 2002;
NU-1905 § 1, 94; NU-1376 §1, 86)

7.20.200 Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this Chapter or any part thereof
is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of
this Chapter or any part thereof.
(History: Ord. NU-2939 §11, 2011; NU-1376 §1, 86)

7.20.210 Title; Definitions; Applicability of Other Provisions. (Expired)
Expired.
(History: Ord. NU-1974 §1, 96; NU-1922 §1, 95; NU-1850 §1, 94; NU-1781 §1, 93)

7.20.220 Excessive Growth Unlawful; Responsibility to Abate. (Expired)
Expired.



                                                                                                  Page 8
(History: Ord. NU-1974 §2, 96; NU-1922 §2, 95; NU-1850 §2, 94; NU-1781 §2, 93)

7.20.230 Notice. (Expired)
Expired.
(History: Ord. NU-1974 §3, 96; NU-1922 §3, 95; NU-1850 §3, 94; NU-1781 §3, 93)

7.20.240 Notice of Abatement; Hearing; Designated Officer. (Expired)
Expired.
(History: Ord. NU-1974 §4, 96; NU-1922 §4, 95; NU-1850 §4, 94; NU-1781 §4, 93)

7.20.250 Abatement; Assessment of Costs. (Expired)
Expired.
(History: Ord. NU-1974 §5, 96; NU-1922 §5, 95; NU-1850 §5, 94; NU-1781 §5, 93)

7.20.260 Expiration Date. (Expired)
Expired.
(History: Ord. NU-1974 §6, 96; NU-1922 §6, 95; NU-1850 §6, 94; NU-1781 §6, 93)




                                                                                 Page 9
TITLE 7 - HEALTH AND SANITATION

7.22 VEHICLE USE, PARKING AND STORAGE
Contents:
 7.22.010 Legislative Findings.
 7.22.020 Scope.
 7.22.030 Definitions.
 7.22.040 Inoperable Vehicles.
 7.22.050 Proof of Operability.
 7.22.060 Parking on Unpaved Surfaces.
 7.22.070 Commercial and Other Vehicles in Residential Zoning Districts.
 7.22.080 Recreational Vehicles, Boats and Hauling Trailers.
 7.22.085 Time Restriction on Outside Automobile Repairs.
 7.22.090 Vehicles as Living Quarters.
 7.22.100 Severability.
 7.22.110 Penalty.

7.22.010 Legislative Findings.
The Governing Body finds that the types of vehicles that are parked or stored, the location on a
particular site of such parking or storage, and the condition of the vehicles which are parked or
stored has a direct effect on the health, safety and general welfare of the Residents of the City. The
Governing Body finds that the improper or inappropriate storage or parking of vehicles can be
unsafe, unsanitary and unsightly, and that such conditions constitute a blight on surrounding
properties. The Governing Body further finds that in order to prevent such blight, stabilize the value
of surrounding properties, and minimize threats to the public safety and general welfare of the
Residents of the City, it is hereby deemed necessary to regulate the manner in which vehicles are
parked or stored, the types of vehicles that are parked or stored, and the location of such parking or
storage.
(History: Ord. PMV-2881 §1, 2010; PMV-1900 §1, 95)

7.22.020 Scope.
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all lands within the corporate boundaries of the City of
Overland Park unless specifically excepted.
(History: Ord. PMV-2881 §2, 2010; PMV-1900 §2, 95)




                                                                                              Page 1
7.22.030 Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall be defined as follows for the purpose of this Chapter:
   A. Automobile Repair shall mean the repair or restoration of any Motor Vehicle body or
      parts, and shall include, without being limited to, glass installation and replacement, brake
      and muffler repair and replacement, window tinting, radio and stereo installation, tire and
      battery replacement, tune ups, repair and servicing of Motor Vehicle engines, including
      overhauls, transmission work, body work and painting.
   B. Chapter or this Chapter shall mean Chapter 7.22 of the Overland Park Municipal Code.
    C. City means the City of Overland Park, Kansas.
   D. Commercial Vehicle means any vehicle that meets a minimum of one of the following
      criteria:
       1. The vehicle has a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating > 10,000 pounds;
       2. The length of the vehicle exceeds 20 feet;
       3. The width of the vehicle exceeds 8 feet;
       4. The height of the vehicle exceeds 8 feet;
       5. The vehicle has permanently mounted equipment, such as aerial buckets or platforms,
          welding equipment, mechanical or hydraulic devises designed to assist in loading and
          unloading freight; and
       6. The vehicle is a step van, box van, bus, or a semi-tractor.
    E. Director means the Director of Planning and Development Services or his or her designee.
    F. Enclosed Building shall mean the primary structure or a detached garage fully enclosed by
       walls and a roof, with all windows or doors completely closed.
   G. Fifth-wheel Trailer means a Travel Trailer designed to be affixed to, and towed by,
      a Pickup Truck equipped with a special hitch in the truck bed.
   H. Folding Camper Trailer means a light-weight unit with sides that collapse for towing or
      storage, and is sometimes referred to as a fold-down camper, pop-up Trailer or tent Trailer.
    I. Former Military Vehicle means a vehicle, including a Trailer, regardless of the vehicle's
       size, weight, or year of manufacture, that was manufactured for use in any country's military
       forces or is a replica of such a vehicle.
    J. Front Surface of a Residence means that wall surface, or combination of surfaces, that is
       visible from the front lot line; provided, however, that surfaces which are perpendicular or
       nearly perpendicular to the front lot line are excluded, as are surfaces of minor building
       projections such as fireplaces or bay windows.
   K. Hauling Trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed to carry property and
      to be drawn by a Motor Vehicle, excluding a boat Trailer with a boat on it.
    L. Inoperable means:
        1. A condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, discarded,
           abandoned or unable to perform the functions or purposes for which it was originally
           constructed, or




                                                                                               Page 2
   2. The absence of a current valid registration plate upon such vehicle permitting that vehicle
      to be operated on the public streets and highways of the State of Kansas, or
   3. The absence of one or more of the parts of the vehicle necessary for the lawful operation
      of the vehicle on the public streets and highways, unless the vehicle has a non-highway
      title issued solely because the vehicle was not manufactured for street use, or
   4. The placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks, chains or other supports.
M. Motorized RV means a vehicle, also known as a motor home, which combines
   transportation and living quarters in one unit, ranging from a minivan up to a large bus-size.
   It does not include the tractor portion of a highway tractor-Trailer.
N. Motor Vehicle means any automobile, truck, tractor, farm machinery or Motorcycle which
   as originally built contained an engine, regardless of whether it contains an engine at any
   other time. For the purposes of this Section, the term "vehicle" not prefaced by the terms
   "motor," "commercial," "specially constructed" or "recreational" shall include any or all of the
   following, depending on the context and intended usage of that term: boat, Hauling Trailer,
   Commercial Vehicle, Motor Vehicle, Specially Constructed Vehicle or Recreational Vehicle.
O. Officer of the City or City Officer means an Code Compliance Officer or a Police Officer
   employed by the City of Overland Park or any other individual designated as a City Officer by
   the City Manager.
P. Passenger Car, Passenger Van, Pickup Truck or Motorcycle means a vehicle:
    1. licensed for use on public streets,
    2. designed primarily for the transportation of people as opposed to equipment, freight or
       other vehicles, and
    3. sold primarily to individuals for personal use.
   This definition shall include automobiles commonly referred to as coupes, sedans,
   hatchbacks, station wagons, convertibles, sports utility vehicles, minivan, passenger van and
   pickup trucks.
   Vehicles which would otherwise meet this definition but which have had modifications to the
   interior of the vehicle, such as removing rear seats in a van to allow the carrying of
   cargo, shall be deemed to be included within this definition. Vehicles which would otherwise
   meet this definition but which are carrying useful items commonly found in residential areas,
   such as ladders, saw horses, or building materials, shall be deemed to be included within this
   definition. Vehicles which would otherwise meet this definition but which have had
   accessories, such as racks, storage boxes or shells, added to the vehicle shall be deemed to be
   included within this definition.
   Vehicles which would otherwise meet this definition but which have had external
   modifications to the structure or body, but not including cosmetic changes or common
   vehicle accessories, shall be deemed to be excluded from this definition. Pickup Trucks that
   do not have the traditional pickup bed and side walls, and vans that have an expanded cargo
   area that is taller or wider than a passenger van are specifically excluded from this definition.
   Vehicle modifications which are specifically excluded from this definition include aerial
   buckets or platforms (e.g. "cherry pickers"), welding equipment, and mechanical lifts or arms
   designed to assist in loading and unloading freight. Vehicle types which are specifically
   excluded from this definition include, but are not limited to, step vans, box vans, flatbed




                                                                                            Page 3
   trucks, buses, semi-tractors and Trailers, Former Military Vehicles, cement mixers,
   construction equipment, and any vehicle with dual rear axles.
Q. Paved Driveway or Paved Parking Area means a hard-surfaced area designed and
   constructed specifically for use by motorized vehicles as a path for the vehicle to be driven
   across or as a location at which a vehicle could be parked or stored. Such driveways and
   parking areas shall include only that surface area that is continuously connected to a public
   or private street via a paved surface wide enough for use by a standard Passenger Car. The
   paving material for a "Paved Driveway or Paved Parking Area" shall consist of concrete,
   asphalt, paving bricks or similar material approved by the City. Gravel may be used as a
   paving material if it meets the requirements of Overland Park Municipal Code Section
   18.410.075 as a nonconforming site improvement. The term "Paved Driveway" or "Paved
   Parking Area" may include a public or private street where on-street parking is permitted.
R. Property Owner means any person, partnership or corporation who alone or jointly or
   severally with others has legal title to land and/or structures, or any person, partnership or
   corporation who is trustee or guardian of the estate of the title holder.
 S. Recreational Vehicle shall mean a vehicular-type unit which is:
     1. built on a chassis or for use on a chassis, and
     2. designed primarily as temporary living quarters for recreational or travel use, and
     3. has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.
    This definition shall be limited to:
     1. vehicles originally manufactured and sold as Recreational Vehicles meeting the conditions
        listed above, limited to a Folding Camper Trailer, a Truck Camper, a Travel Trailer, a Fifth-
        wheel Trailer or a Motorized RV, as shown on the attached illustrations,
     2. minivans, full size vans or buses specifically modified to meet the three conditions listed
        above.
    This definition shall not include mobile homes, the tractor portion of a highway tractor-
    Trailer, or any Specially Constructed Vehicle. The exclusion of a highway tractor shall apply
    regardless of whether or not it was originally constructed with a sleeper unit or later
    modified for temporary living use.
T. Resident or Tenant shall mean the person, partnership or corporation occupying or
   utilizing the primary structure on the site as a residence in a residential structure or as a
   business Tenant in a nonresidential structure.
U. Residential Zoning Districts means that land area, including public and private streets,
   that is contained within one of the zoning districts defined by the Unified Development
   Ordinance of the City of Overland Park as a residential district. This definition shall include
   those sections of public and private streets that abut residentially zoned land on both sides.
V. Section means the stated Section of the Overland Park Municipal Code.
W. Specially Constructed Vehicle means any vehicle which shall not have been originally
   constructed under a distinctive name, make, model or type, or which, if originally otherwise
   constructed shall have been materially altered by the removal of essential parts, or by the
   addition or substitution of essential parts, new or used, derived from other vehicles or makes
   of vehicles.




                                                                                             Page 4
    X. Trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed to carry property and to be
       drawn by a Motor Vehicle.
    Y. Travel Trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed to be towed by a
       Motor Vehicle and designed and constructed to be used primarily for temporary living
       quarters for recreational purposes.
    Z. Truck Camper means a detachable camping unit loaded onto, or affixed to the bed or
       chassis of an unmodified Pickup Truck or a detachable camping unit by itself.
  AA. Vehicle Owner means the person, partnership or corporation registered as the owner of a
      particular vehicle.
  BB. Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Regulations means the requirements and regulations of
      Title 18, Unified Development Ordinance.


Illustration A is incorporated into the Overland Park Municipal Code.
(History: Ord. PMV-3351 §1, 2021; Ord. PMV-2881 §3, 2010; PMV-2577 §1, 2008; PMV-2109 §1, 98;
PMV-1900 §3, 95)
                                          ILLUSTRATION A
                                        Recreational Vehicles

                              Class A
                              motor
                              home



                              Class B
                              motor
                              home



                              Class C
                              motor
                              home


                              Travel
                              Trailer


                              Folding
                              Camper
                              Trailer




                                                                                      Page 5
                              Fifth-
                              wheel
                              Trailer


                              Truck
                              Camper




7.22.040 Inoperable Vehicles.
   A. Except as provided below, it is unlawful for any Property Owner to park or store, or allow the
      parking or storage of, an Inoperable vehicle on such property unless it is enclosed within a
      garage or other building.
   B. Except as provided below, it is unlawful for any Resident or Tenant with control of a property
      to park or store, or allow the parking or storage of, an Inoperable vehicle on such property
      unless it is enclosed within a garage or other building.
   C. Except as provided below, it is unlawful for any Vehicle Owner to park or store, or allow the
      parking or storage of, such vehicle in an Inoperable condition unless it is enclosed within a
      garage or other building.
   D. The provisions of this Section shall not apply where there is only one Inoperable vehicle on
      the property and where the vehicle is Inoperable for a period of fifteen consecutive days or
      less.
   E. The provision of this Section shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or their
      agent, who is conducting a business enterprise concerned with the repair, sale or storage of
      vehicles in compliance with the existing Zoning Ordinance.
   F. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to those properties annexed into the City by
      either Ordinance No. A-2367 or Ordinance No. A-2719 that have a zoning designation based
      on the Johnson County Zoning Regulations.
(History: Ord. PMV-2881 §4, 2010; PMV-2695 §1, 2008; PMV-2401 §1, 2002; PMV-1900 §4, 95)

7.22.050 Proof of Operability.
When, after reasonable investigation, the City Officer believes a vehicle meets the definition of an
Inoperable vehicle in Section 7.22.030, the vehicle shall be deemed to be an Inoperable vehicle
subject to the provisions of Section 7.22.040.
Where a vehicle is (1) parked or stored in a Residential Zoning District so that it is visible from a
public or private street, or from adjacent private property with the permission of the adjacent
Property Owner; and (2) the license plate of such vehicle is screened from view by an adjacent
structure or vegetation, or by a cover, tarp or similar object, then the vehicle shall be deemed to be
an Inoperable vehicle subject to the provisions of Section 7.22.040.




                                                                                              Page 6
In both cases, such a determination may be voided if the Property Owner, Vehicle Owner or
Resident demonstrates to the City Officer that the vehicle is operable on a public street and
furnishes proof that the vehicle has a license plate and current registration as required for
operation of the vehicle on public streets and highways. Such demonstration or proof shall be
provided to an authorized Officer of the City within fifteen days from the date when a notice of
violation was first given to the Property Owner, Vehicle Owner or Resident. It shall be a violation of
this Section to fail to provide such demonstration of operability or proof of registration within the
specified time whether or not said vehicle is operable or legally registered.
For the purposes of this Section, a vehicle shall be considered visible, even if covered, if the shape of
the covered object is recognizable as a vehicle. Any covered object not recognizable as a vehicle
shall be governed by the storage of useful items provisions of the Municipal Code.
(History: Ord. PMV-2881 §5, 2010; PMV-1900 §5, 95)

7.22.060 Parking on Unpaved Surfaces.
    A. No Vehicle Owner, Property Owner, Resident or Tenant shall allow a vehicle to be parked or
       stored outside of a building on any surface other than a Paved Driveway or a Paved Parking
       Area.
    B. This Section shall not apply to agricultural equipment parked on property used primarily for
       agricultural purposes; to Recreational Vehicles, boats or Hauling Trailers parked in
       compliance with the provisions of this Chapter; or to temporary events where parking on
       unpaved surfaces has been specifically approved by the City through a special event permit.
    C. This Section shall not apply to those properties that have a zoning designation based on the
       Johnson County Zoning Regulations.
(History: Ord. PMV-2881 §6, 2010; PMV-1900 §6, 95)

7.22.070 Commercial and Other Vehicles in Residential Zoning Districts.
    A. In Residential Zoning Districts, the following limitations shall apply:
        1. No Vehicle Owner, Property Owner, Resident or Tenant shall park or store a Commercial
           Vehicle or Former Military Vehicle on a public street, private street or on private property
           in a Residential Zoning District.

               Exemptions:
               a. Commercial Vehicles that are part of a lawfully permitted or approved construction
                  project actively underway.
              b. Commercial Vehicles used in making service calls, deliveries or engaged in legitimate
                  loading or unloading activities.
       2. Notwithstanding the above prohibitions, flatbed trucks with or without sidewalls,
          and Pickup Trucks with a bed and sidewalls different from the traditional pickup bed and
          sidewalls may be eligible to receive a written administrative approval to allow parking
          and storage in a residential area if an application is received by the City within five days
          from the date of a written inspection notice from an authorized City Officer and permitted
          if it is demonstrated to an Officer of the City that:
       3.



                                                                                                 Page 7
        a. The length of the vehicle does not exceed 20 feet;
        b. The width of the vehicle does not exceed 8 feet;
        c. The height of the vehicle does not exceed 8 feet;
        d. The top of the highest sidewall is not more than 3 feet above the bed; and
        e. There is no permanently mounted equipment, such as aerial buckets or platforms,
           welding equipment, mechanical or hydraulic devices designed to assist in loading
           and unloading freight;
        f. Said parking and storage would otherwise comply with all applicable laws, rules and
           regulations.

       Parking or storage of flatbed trucks with or without sidewalls, and Pickup Trucks with a
       bed and sidewalls different from the traditional pickup bed and sidewalls, without a
       lawful written administrative approval, is prohibited.
B. It shall be unlawful for any Property Owner, Resident, Tenant or Vehicle Owner, agent,
   operator, or person in charge of any Former Military Vehicle to permit a Former Military
   Vehicle to be parked, stored or kept on private property in a Residential Zoning District. Each
   day that a violation of this Section occurs shall be considered a separate violation. The
   Director may, upon a request submitted in writing, evaluate the original intended use of a
   particular Former Military Vehicle, the absence or presence of military design, markings,
   equipment, attachments, modifications, and any other relevant factors, and make a
   determination in writing that the vehicle is so substantially similar in appearance and
   function to an ordinary Passenger Vehicle, and suitable for being parked in a residential area,
   for the vehicle to be exempt from the provisions of this Section and to be subject to the
   parking regulations applying to a Passenger Car, Passenger Van, Pickup Truck and
   Motorcycle rather than a Former Military Vehicle. Any alteration of the vehicle after
   obtaining such a written determination shall void the determination that the vehicle is
   exempt from this Section.
C. This Section shall not apply to the parking of a Passenger Car, Passenger Van, Pickup Truck or
   Motorcycle as a lawful accessory use to a lawful residential use; agricultural equipment
   parked on property used primarily for agricultural purposes; to Recreational Vehicles, boats
   or Hauling Trailers parked in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter; to vehicles
   parked in conjunction with a legal, non-residential use other than a home occupation; or to
   land that is subject to a special use permit for a non-residential use.
D. This Section shall not apply to those properties that have a zoning designation based on the
   Johnson County Zoning Regulations.
E. No Specially Constructed Vehicle shall be parked or stored lawfully under this Section unless
   the owner has previously obtained a written administrative approval from an authorized City
   Officer based on a determination by said Officer that such vehicle is substantially similar to
   other vehicles permitted under this Section and complies with the intent and purpose of
   these regulations.
F. All vehicles must be parked or stored on the principal legal residence of the registered owner
   of the vehicle. If the vehicle in question is not required or permitted to be registered,
   sufficient documentation of ownership must be presented to and approved by the City upon
   request.




                                                                                          Page 8
(History: Ord. PMV-3351 §2, 2021; Ord. PMV-2921 §1, 2011; PMV-2881 §7, 2010; PMV-2833 §1,
2009; PMV-2577 §2, 2008; PMV-1962 §1, 95; PMV-1953 §1, 95; PMV-1900 §7, 95)

7.22.080 Recreational Vehicles, Boats and Hauling Trailers.
   A. Any parking or storage of Recreational Vehicles, boats and Hauling Trailers, not screened
      from view from any public right-of-way or adjacent property by a wall or fence that is not
      specifically permitted by this Section is prohibited. When approved by the Director, mature
      landscaping material may be substituted for a wall or fence. Any modification to an existing
      fence shall be subject to a fence permit and a determination by the Director whether the
      proposed fence modifications are compatible with the existing fence. Refer to Section
      18.390.140 Development and Performance Standards for fences and walls.
   B. Each residence is permitted, subject to the restrictions specified in this Section, to park or
      store, behind a wall or fence, any combination of the following: a boat, with or without a boat
      Trailer: a Folding Camper Trailer; a Truck Camper; a Travel Trailer; a Fifth-wheel Trailer; a
      Hauling Trailer; and/or a Motorized RV. Screening shall be subject to the following
      provisions:
       1. The parking and storage of permitted items shall be behind the Front Surface of a
          Residence, in the side or rear yards.
       2. The parking and storage of permitted items shall occupy no more than 20% of the
          allowable outside storage area.
       3. Only one permitted item is approved to be visually seen above a wall or fence by a person
          standing on a street or other property at ground level. The amount of projection above the
          fence shall not exceed 25% of the total height of the fence or wall.
       4. The parking and storage of permitted items shall be at least 3 feet from the side or rear
          property lines.
   C. Such parking or storage of a boat, with or without a boat Trailer, a Folding Camper Trailer,
      Truck Camper, Travel Trailer, Fifth-wheel Trailer, a Motorized RV, or a Hauling Trailer shall
      be subject to the following restrictions:
       1. Storage or parking areas are not required to be paved; provided, however, that any boat,
          Recreational Vehicle or Hauling Trailer must be parked or stored, or driven to and from
          said parking or storage area, on a dust-free and rut-free surface, including, without being
          limited to, any such areas covered with grass, ground cover, water-permeable grass
          pavers, cement, asphalt or other similar ground cover. Parking, storage or driving on
          gravel or exposed dirt is prohibited; provided, however, driving on a gravel driveway that
          has been previously established as a lawful nonconforming use as permitted.
       2. Any boat, Recreational Vehicle or Hauling Trailer parked or stored must be operable, not
          leaking fluids and maintained in a clean, well-kept state that does not detract from the
          appearance of the surrounding area.
       3. All vehicles must be parked or stored on the principal legal residence of the registered
          owner of the vehicle. If the item is not required or permitted to be registered, sufficient
          documentation of ownership must be submitted to and approved by the City upon
          request.
   D. The following is an exception to the above requirement:




                                                                                             Page 9
    1. The Director may approve the parking or storage of a boat, with or without a boat Trailer
       and may approve the parking, storage, and, notwithstanding any other provisions to the
       contrary, the temporary overnight living occupancy of a Folding Camper Trailer, Truck
       Camper, Travel Trailer, Fifth-wheel Trailer, Hauling Trailer or Motorized RV on a Paved
       Driveway between the street and a residence, if the following requirements are met:
          a. The vehicle is owned or leased by a visitor to the residence and the owner of the
             residence has applied to the Director and received a permit to park said vehicle on
             the driveway.
          b. The period of time for the vehicle parking or storage is specified and approved as a
             part of the permit.
          c. No equipment on the vehicle, such as a generator, that creates noise in violation of
             7.08 Noise shall be operated, nor shall the engine be idled, while the vehicle is
             parked on the Paved Driveway.
          d. The vehicle shall not obstruct the sidewalk or street.
          e. The vehicle meets the condition requirements for vehicles stated previously in this
             Section.
          f. The permit may be revoked for any violation of these conditions or any other
             applicable law, ordinance or regulation.
E. The Director may approve the parking or storage, or an alternative location or screening for
   items that do no meet the restrictions set out above. Such approval shall be accompanied by a
   screening plan designed to meet the above restrictions and minimize the impact of the
   exception on the surrounding properties. Such approval shall be valid only as long as the
   screening specified in the plan is in place and maintained in good condition.
F. This Section shall not apply to those properties that have a zoning designation based on the
   Johnson County Zoning Regulations.
G. This Section shall not apply to the parking of a Passenger Car, Passenger Van, Pickup Truck or
   Motorcycle, not otherwise included with the definition of a Recreational or Commercial
   Vehicle, as a lawful accessory use to the lawful residential use.
H. Exceptions - The prohibition of the storage or parking of a boat, with or without a boat
   Trailer, Folding Camper Trailer, Truck Camper, Travel Trailer, Fifth-wheel Trailer, Motorized
   RV or Hauling Trailer shall not apply under the following circumstances:
    1. The otherwise prohibited item was in lawful ownership of a Resident of the City prior to
       January 1, 2022; and
    2. The otherwise prohibited item was lawfully stored or parked at the owner's residence
       within the City prior to January 1, 2022; and
    3. That item, after January 1, 2022, is parked and stored in as full compliance with the
       requirements of this Section as feasible, as determined by the Director.
    4. The exceptions set forth in this subsection shall not apply to parking or storage of items in
       the rear yard that were previously permitted to be parked or stored unscreened from
       view prior to January 1, 2022.
    5. These exceptions to the prohibition specified in subsections 1-3 above shall terminate
       upon death or relocation of the current owner and shall not pass with any transfer of title




                                                                                           Page 10
          or by will or other succession. These exceptions shall also terminate upon the sale,
          transfer or end of the useful life of the nonconforming item.
    I. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any property that was annexed into the City
       pursuant to Ordinance No. A-2719, unless and until such property is rezoned.


(History: Ord. PMV-3351 §3, 2021; Ord. PMV-2881 §8, 2010; PMV-2736 §1, 2008; PMV-2577 §3,
2008; ROCR-2245 §10, 2001; PMV-1965 §1, 96; PMV-1900 §8, 95)

7.22.085 Time Restriction on Outside Automobile Repairs.
    A. Except as provided in subsection (B) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to perform or
       allow the performance of any Automobile Repairs, as defined herein, on any residentially
       zoned or used property between the hours of 10 P.M. and 7 A.M.
    B. The following activities shall be exempt from this time restriction:
        1. Automobile Repairs that are allowed as a matter of right in the zoning district
           regulations or have been specially permitted under the applicable provisions of the
           Unified Development Ordinance; provided, however, that accessory uses in residentially
           used property shall not be exempt.
        2. Emergency repair or replacement of a flat tire or dead battery.
        3. Automobile Repairs conducted entirely within an Enclosed Building, as defined herein
           and conducted in conformity with all other applicable codes and ordinances.
(History: Ord. PMV-2881 §9, 2010; PMV-2109 §2, 98)

7.22.090 Vehicles as Living Quarters.
No vehicle, motor home, camping Trailer, pickup camper, Recreational Vehicle, or similar item shall
be used as living quarters within the boundaries of the City of Overland Park unless such vehicle is
parked in an area specifically approved by the Governing Body as a campground or as a location for
temporary or emergency housing.
(History: Ord. PMV-2881 §10, 2010; PMV-1900 §9, 95)

7.22.100 Severability.
If any word, phrase, sentence or Section of this Chapter, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances, is held to be invalid, the invalidity shall be deemed not to affect other provisions or
applications of the Chapter which can be enforced without the invalid provision or application, and
to this end the provisions of this Chapter are severable.
(History: Ord. PMV-2881 §11, 2010; PMV-1900 §10, 95)

7.22.110 Penalty.




                                                                                             Page 11
The violation of any provision of this Chapter is a public offense and any person, firm, association,
partnership or corporation convicted thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010.
Each day that any violation of this Chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Prosecution of any violation as a public offense pursuant to this Section may be in addition to, or as
an alternative to, any other remedy or course of action available to the City.
(History: Ord. PMV-2881 §12, 2010; PMV-1900 §11, 95)




                                                                                             Page 12
TITLE 7 - HEALTH AND SANITATION

7.25 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Contents:
 7.25.100 Incorporation.
 7.25.101.1 Title.
 7.25.101.2 Purpose and Scope.
 7.25.102.3 Application of other codes.
 7.25.102.5 Workmanship.
 7.25.103.2 Appointment.
 7.25.103.5 Omitted.
 7.25.106.4 Violation Penalties.
 7.25.106.5 Abatement of violation.
 7.25.108.8 Damage or loss to buildings or other structures.
 7.25.109.1 Imminent danger.
 7.25.110 Demolition.
 7.25.111.1 Application for appeal.
 7.25.111.2 Omitted.
 7.25.302.1 Sanitation.
 7.25.302.3 Sidewalks and driveways.
 7.25.302.4 Omitted (See Chapter 7.20 - Weeds).
 7.25.302.10 Animal Sanitation.
 7.25.302.11 Pools of water.
 7.25.302.12 Exterior storage.
 7.25.302.13 Rain Barrels.
 7.25.303.1 Swimming Pools
 7.25.304.2 Protective Treatment.
 7.25.304.6 Exterior walls.
 7.25.304.14 Insect screens.
 7.25.308.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
 7.25.506.2 Maintenance
 7.25.602.3 Heat supply.
 7.25.602.4 Occupiable work spaces.



                                                               Page 1
 7.25.606.1 General.
 7.25.800

7.25.100 Incorporation
There is incorporated by reference, for the purpose of adopting regulations, provisions, conditions,
terms, and specifications governing the conditions and maintenance of all structures and premises
within the City, the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code (the “International Property
Maintenance Code”), as published by the International Code Council, Inc., excepting and including
such parts or portions thereof as are specifically deleted, amended, replaced or supplemented in
Overland Park Municipal Code Chapter 7.25. At least one copy of the International Property
Maintenance Code shall be marked “Official Copy as Incorporated by Ordinance No. PM-3289, to
which shall be attached a copy of the ordinance codified herein, and filed with the City Clerk to be
open to inspection and available to the public at all reasonable business hours. The Municipal Court
and all administrative departments of the City charged with the enforcement of the ordinance shall
be supplied at the cost of the City such number of official copies of such ordinance as may be
deemed expedient.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §2, 2020)

7.25.101.1
These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Overland Park, Kansas, hereinafter referred to as “this Code.”
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §3, 2020)



7.25.101.2 Purpose and Scope
101.2.1 Purpose. The Governing Body finds that there exists within the City conditions of
structures and premises which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or general welfare of
the occupants of such structures and premises or other residents of the City or which have a
blighting influence on the properties in the area. Such conditions include the following, without
limitation: defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of
adequate ventilation; air pollution; light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structure
defects; uncleanliness; overcrowding; inadequate ingress and egress; dead and dying trees, limbs or
other unsightly natural growth and unsightly appearances that constitute a blight to adjoining
property, the neighborhood or the City; walls, sidings or exteriors of a quality and appearance not
commensurate with the character of the properties in the neighborhood; unsightly stored or
parked material, equipment, supplies and machinery and vermin infestation; inadequate drainage;
or any violation of health, fire, building or any other laws or regulations relating to the use of land
and the use and occupancy of the buildings and improvements.
The Governing Body further finds that any of the foregoing conditions render such structures or
premises unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or morals, or
otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the City.




                                                                                               Page 2
101.2.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential
structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for
premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation,
protection from the elements, a reasonable level of safety from fire and other hazards, and for
reasonable level of sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, an owner’s authorized
agent, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for
administration, enforcement and penalties.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §4, 2020)

7.25.102.3 Application of other codes.
Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in
accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Building Code of the City of Overland Park,
Kansas, as set forth in OPMC Chapters 16.100 through 16.180. Nothing in this Code shall be
construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provisions of Titles 7 or 18 of the Overland Park
Municipal Code.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §5, 2020)

7.25.102.5 Workmanship
Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations that are caused directly or indirectly by the
enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Repairs made to exterior walls, roofs, doors and
windows shall be made of materials that are compatible with the existing material unless otherwise
approved by the Code Official.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §6, 2020)

7.25.103.2 Appointment
Except where otherwise specifically provided in this ordinance, the Director of Planning and
Development Services shall be the administrative official charged with interpreting and enforcing
the provisions of this code. The Director of Planning and Development Services shall be known as
the Code Official, and such term shall include the Director’s authorized representatives. Further,
whenever the terms or title “administrative authority,” “code enforcement officer,” “responsible
official,” “building official,” “director,” “public officer” or other similar designation is used in this
code or any adopted standard, it shall be construed to mean the Director of Planning and
Development Services.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §7, 2020)

7.25.103.5
Section 103.5 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby omitted.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §8, 2020)

7.25.106.4 Violation Penalties


                                                                                                 Page 3
Any person who violates a provision of this Code, or fails to comply with therewith, or with any of
the requirements thereof, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law, or other references
incorporated, is guilty of a public offense, punishable as provided in OPMC Section 1.12.010.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §9, 2020)

7.25.106.5 Abatement of violation
If the owner fails to timely comply with a notice of violation, the Code Official may (but is not
required to) take such action as is reasonably necessary to abate the violation. Neither the Code
Official nor the City shall be responsible for damage to the premises due to any reasonable exercise
of abatement. The Code Official may use City's employees or contract for services to abate the
violations.
      106.5.1 Notice of Costs and Assessment. If a violation is abated, the Code Official shall, in
      the manner prescribed in Section 107.3, provide the owner or person responsible a notice of
      costs providing:
           1. A description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
           2. The nature of the violation and the abatement work performed.
           3. The abatement costs incurred (including administrative costs).
           4. A demand for payment within 30 days from the date of notice.
           5. A statement that the failure to pay within 30 days will allow the City to file a tax lien
              against the premises or to pursue litigation for the recovery of costs.
      If unpaid after 30 days of the notice of costs, the abatement costs shall be assessed as a
      special assessment against the premises, and a lien shall be placed on the premises.
      Thereafter, the city clerk, at the time of certifying other City taxes, shall certify the unpaid
      portion of the costs, and the county clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of the County
      against the premises. Assessments under this section shall be superior to all liens except
      general tax liens. Provided the City may collect such costs in the manner provided at K.S.A.
      12-1,115, by bringing an action in the appropriate court as a personal debt, and the City may
      pursue both assessment and collection until the full cost, including applicable interest, court
      costs, attorney's fees and administrative costs have been paid in full.
      106.5.3 Impact on prosecution. The imposition of abatement shall not preclude any
      appropriate prosecution or penalties, nor shall the imposition of any prosecution or penalties
      preclude the Code Official from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a
      violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an
      illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §10, 2020)

7.25.108.8 Damage or loss to buildings or other structures.
Damage or loss to buildings or other structures shall comply with the provisions of Sections 108.8.1
through 108.8.11.




                                                                                               Page 4
108.8.1 Scope and application. The City is hereby authorized to utilize the procedures
established by K.S.A. 40-3901 et seq., whereby no insurance company shall pay a claim of a
named insured for loss or damage to any building or other structure located within the City,
where the amount recoverable for the loss or damage to the building or other structure
under all policies is in excess of 75% of the face value of the policy covering such building or
other structure, unless there is compliance with the procedures set out in this Code.
108.8.2 Lien created. There is hereby created a lien in favor of the City on the proceeds of
any insurance policy based upon a covered claim payment made for damage or loss to a
building or other structure located within the City, where the amount recoverable for all the
loss or damage to the building or other structure under all policies is in excess of 75% of the
face value of the policy(s) covering such building or other insured structure. The lien arises
upon any unpaid tax, special ad valorem levy, or any other charge imposed upon real
property by or on behalf of the City which is an encumbrance on real property, whether or
not evidenced by written instrument, or such tax, levy, assessment, expense or other charge
that has remained undischarged for at least one year prior to the filing of a proof of loss.
108.8.3 Same, encumbrances. Prior to final settlement on any claim covered by Section
108.8.2, the insurer or insurers shall contact the County Treasurer, Johnson County, Kansas,
to determine whether any such encumbrances are presently in existence. If the same are
found to exist, the insurer or insurers shall execute and transmit in an amount equal to that
owing under the encumbrances a draft payable to the County Treasurer, Johnson County,
Kansas.
108.8.4 Same; pro rata basis. Such transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all
insurance companies insuring the building or other structure.
108.8.5 Procedure:
    1. When final settlement on a covered claim has been agreed to or arrived at between
       the named insured or insureds and the company or companies, and the final
       settlement exceeds 75% of the face value of the policy covering any building or other
       insured structure, and when all amounts due the holder of a first real estate mortgage
       against the building or other structure, pursuant to the terms of the policy and
       endorsements thereto, shall have been paid, the insurance company or companies
       shall execute a draft payable to the Chief Financial Officer in an amount equal to the
       sum of 15% of the covered claim payment, unless the Code Official has issued a
       certificate to the insurance company or companies that the insured has removed the
       damaged building or other structure, as well as all associated debris, or repaired,
       rebuilt, or otherwise made the premises safe and secure.
    2. Such transfer of funds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies insuring the
       building or other structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to the City
       shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms.
    3. Upon the transfer of funds as required by Section 108.8.1, the insurance company
       shall provide the City with the name and address of the named insured or insureds,
       the total insurance coverage applicable to said building or other structure, and the
       amount of the final settlement agreed to or arrived at between the insurance company
       or companies and the insured or insureds, whereupon the Code Official shall contact
       the named insured or insureds by certified mail, return receipt requested, notifying




                                                                                        Page 5
       them that said insurance proceeds have been received by the City and apprise them of
       the procedures to be followed under this Ordinance.
108.8.6 Fund created; deposit of moneys. The Chief Financial Officer is hereby authorized
and shall create a fund to be known as the “Insurance Proceeds Fund.” All moneys received
by the Chief Financial Officer as provided for by this Ordinance shall be placed in said fund
and deposited in an interest-bearing account.
108.8.7 Building Inspector; investigation, removal of structure.
    1. Upon receipt of moneys provided for by this Ordinance, the Chief Financial Officer
       shall immediately notify the Code Official of said receipt, and transmit all
       documentation received from the insurance company or companies to the Code
       Official .
    2. Within forty-five (45) days of the receipt of said moneys, the Code Official shall
       determine, after prior investigation, whether the City shall instigate proceedings
       under the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended.
    3. Prior to the expiration of the forty-five (45) days established by Section 108.8.7(2),
       the Code Official shall notify the Chief Financial Officer whether proceedings will be
       initiated under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended.
    4. If the Code Official has determined that proceedings under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as
       amended shall be initiated, the Code Official will do so immediately but no later than
       forty-five (45) days after receipt of the moneys by the Chief Financial Officer.
    5. Upon notification to the Chief Financial Officer by the Code Official that no
       proceedings shall be initiated under K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended, the Chief
       Financial Officer shall return all such moneys received, plus accrued interest, to the
       insured or insureds as identified in the communication from the insurance company
       or companies. Such return shall be accomplished within forty-five (45) days of the
       receipt of the moneys from the insurance company or companies.
108.8.8 Removal of structure excess moneys. If the Code Official has proceeded under the
provisions of K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq., as amended, all moneys in excess of that which is
ultimately necessary to comply with the provisions for the removal of the building or
structure, less salvage value, if any, shall be paid to the insured.
108.8.9 Same; disposition of funds. If the Code Official, with regard to a building or other
structure damaged determines that it is necessary to act under K.S.A. 12-1756, any proceeds
received by the Chief Financial Officer under the authority of Section 108.8.5(1) relating to
that building or other structure shall be used to reimburse the City for any expenses incurred
by the City in proceeding under K.S.A. 12-1756. Upon reimbursement from the insurance
proceeds, the Code Official shall immediately affect the release of the lien resulting
therefrom. Should the expenses incurred by the City exceed the insurance proceeds paid to
the Chief Financial Officer under Section 108.8.5(1), the Code Official shall publish a new lien
as authorized by K.S.A. 12-1756, in an amount equal to such excess expenses incurred.
108.8.10 Effect upon insurance policies. This Ordinance shall not make the City a party to
any insurance contract, nor is the insurer liable to any party for any amount in excess of the
proceeds otherwise payable under its insurance policy.




                                                                                        Page 6
      108.8.11 Insurers; liability. Insurers complying with this Ordinance or attempting in good
      faith to comply with this Ordinance shall be immune from civil and criminal liability and such
      action shall not be deemed in violation of K.S.A. 40-2404 and any amendments thereto,
      including withholding payment of any insurance proceeds pursuant to this Ordinance, or
      releasing or disclosing any information pursuant to this Ordinance.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §11, 2020)

7.25.109.1 Imminent danger.
When, in the opinion of the Code Official , there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a
building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen
and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential
danger to the building occupants or those in proximity of any structure because of explosives,
explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of
defective or dangerous equipment, the Code Official is hereby authorized and empowered to order
and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The Code Official shall cause to be
posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: “This structure is unsafe and
its occupancy has been prohibited by the Code Official.” It shall be unlawful for any person to enter
such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs,
removing the hazardous condition or demolishing the same. When the Code Official has determined
that a structure is in danger of collapse or has suffered a partial collapse, and thus poses an
imminent danger to life for those in proximity to the structure, the Code Official is further
authorized to order the immediate removal or demolition of the structure or portion thereof as
authorized under K.S.A. 12-1756.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §12, 2020)

7.25.110 Demolition
      110.1 Order of demolition. The Code Official shall order the owner of any premises upon
      which is located any structure, which in the Code Official judgment after review is so
      deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
      insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is
      unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such
      structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to
      board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner’s option; or
      where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of
      more than two years, the Code Official shall order the owner to demolish and remove such
      structure, or board up until further repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall
      not extend beyond one year, unless approved by the Code Official .
            110.1.1 Enforcement. If the Code Official determines that a violation of Section 110.1
            exists, a Notice to Appear in Municipal Court may be issued for such violation. No other
            procedures, including the adherence to the provisions of Section 110.3, are required as
            a prerequisite to the issuance of a Notice to Appear.
      110.2 Notices and orders. Notices and orders shall comply with Section 107.




                                                                                             Page 7
110.3 Demolition or repair by the City. The Governing Body shall have the power to cause
the repair or removal of, or to remove any structure located within the City, which may have
become unsafe or dangerous. This provision and the following subsections are intended to
conform with the provisions of K.S.A. 12-1750 et seq. (as amended from time to time); and to
the extent there is any conflict, the Statute shall take precedent.
      110.3.1 Code official’s report. Whenever the Code Official’s investigation discloses a
      basis that any structure is unsafe or dangerous, the Code Official shall file a written
      report with the Governing Body describing the situation, its location and the
      circumstances that support the determination that the structure is unsafe or
      dangerous.
      110.3.2 Notice and publication for hearing. The Governing Body, by resolution,
      shall fix a time and place at which the owner, the owner’s agent, any lienholders of
      record and any occupant of such structure may appear and show cause why such
      structure should not be condemned and ordered repaired or demolished. Such
      resolution shall be published once each week for two (2) consecutive weeks on the
      same day of each week. At least thirty (30) days shall elapse between the last
      publication and the date set for the hearing. A copy of the resolution shall be mailed by
      certified mail within three (3) days after its first publication to each such owner, agent,
      lienholder and occupant, at the last known address and shall be marked “deliver to
      addressee only.”
      110.3.3 Hearing. On the date fixed for hearing or any adjournment thereof, the
      Governing Body shall hear all evidence submitted by the owner, the owner’s agent,
      lienholders of record and occupants having an interest in such structure as well as
      evidence submitted by the Code Official and shall make findings by resolution.
      Provided, in the event the Code Official determines on or before the date fixed for
      hearing that the structure has been sufficiently repaired or removed, the Code Official
      shall inform the Governing Body and recommend the cancellation of the hearing. Upon
      acceptance of said recommendation, no further action shall be required by the
      Governing Body.
110.3.4 Findings and resolution.
      110.3.4.1 If the Governing Body finds that such structure is unsafe or dangerous, such
      resolution shall direct the structure to be repaired or removed and the premises made
      safe and secure. Such resolution shall be published once in the official city paper and a
      copy mailed to the owners, agents, lienholders of record and occupants in the same
      manner provided for the notice of hearing. The resolution shall fix a reasonable time
      within which the repair or removal of such structure shall be commenced and a
      statement that if the owner of such structure fails to commence the repair or removal
      of such structure within the time stated or fails to diligently prosecute the same until
      the work is completed, the Governing Body will cause the structure to be repaired or
      razed and removed.
      110.3.4.2 If the Governing Body finds that such structure is not unsafe or dangerous,
      such resolution shall state such finding and that the proceeding is terminated. Such
      resolution shall not be required to be published.




                                                                                         Page 8
      110.3.5 Action, assessment and collection of costs by City.
          a. If the owner of any structure has failed to commence the repair or removal of such
             structure within the time stated in the resolution or has failed to diligently prosecute
             the same thereafter, the City may proceed to raze and remove such structure, make
             the premises safe and secure, or let the same to contract.
          b. The City shall keep an account of the cost of such work and may sell the salvage from
             such structure and apply the proceeds or any necessary portion thereof to pay the cost
             of removing such structure and making the premises safe and secure. All moneys in
             excess of that necessary to pay such costs and the cost of publications of notice and
             any postage for mailing of notice, after the payment of all costs, shall be paid to the
             owner of the premises upon which the structure was located.
          c. The City shall give notice to the owner of such structure by restricted mail of the total
             cost incurred by the City in removing such structure and making the premises safe and
             secure and the cost of providing notice. Such notice also shall state that payment of
             such cost is due and payable within thirty (30) days following receipt of such notice. If
             the cost is not paid within the thirty-day period and if there is no salvageable material
             or if moneys received from the sale of salvage or from the proceeds of any insurance
             policy in which the City has created a lien pursuant to K.S.A. 40-3901 et seq., and
             amendments thereto, are insufficient to pay the cost of such work, the balance shall be
             collected in the manner provided by K.S.A. 12-1,115, and amendments thereto, or shall
             be assessed as a special assessment against the lot or parcel of land on which the
             structure was located and the City Clerk at the time of certifying other city taxes, shall
             certify the unpaid portion of the costs and the county clerk shall extend the same on
             the tax rolls of the county against such lot or parcel of land. The City may pursue
             collection both by levying a special assessment and in the manner provided by K.S.A.
             12-1,115, and amendments thereto, but only until the full cost and any applicable
             interest has been paid in full.
          d. Whenever any structure is removed from any premises under the provisions of this
             ordinance, the City Clerk shall certify to the county appraiser that such structure,
             describing the same, has been removed.
      110.4 Duties of owner after removal of structure. The owner of any structure, upon
      removing the same, shall fill any basement or other excavation located upon the premises and
      take any other action necessary to leave such premises in a safe condition.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §13, 2020)



7.25.111.1 Application for appeal.




                                                                                               Page 9
Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official or a notice or order issued under
this Code directly pertaining to the interpretation or application of technical provisions of this
Code shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals, as established in Section
16.100.113.1, provided that written application for appeal is filed within 10 days after the day the
decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the
true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted,
or the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately
satisfied by other means.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §14, 2020)



7.25.111.2 Omitted.
Section 111.2 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby omitted.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §15, 2020)

7.25.302.1 Sanitation
Exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The
occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property that such occupant occupies or controls in a
clean and sanitary condition. Rubbish and garbage shall not be stored or allowed to accumulate on
any premises including but not limited to trash, trash bags, large limb piles, boxes, carpet padding,
building supplies or material.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §16, 2020)

7.25.302.3 Sidewalks and driveways.
Sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper
state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. For the purposes of this section, a
hazardous condition shall include, but not be limited to, a paved surface which is broken, heaved,
collapsed or missing pavement to a degree that vehicles using the surface are at risk of being
damaged or pedestrians walking on the surface are at risk of falling or tripping.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §17, 2020)



7.25.302.4 Omitted (See Chapter 7.20 - Weeds).
Section 302.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby omitted. (See Chapter 7.20 -
Weeds.)
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §18, 2020)

7.25.302.10 Animal Sanitation.




                                                                                            Page 10
Exterior property and premises shall be kept free of an excessive accumulation of animal waste and
any exposed animal carcasses after death.
Provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any property that is zoned RUR,
PRUR, RLD or PRLD that was annexed into the City pursuant to Ordinance No. A-2719, unless and
until such land is rezoned.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §19, 2020)




7.25.302.11 Pools of water.
Ponds, reservoirs, swimming pools or other receptacles of water shall be maintained free of trash,
debris, garbage or other effluvia and shall not serve as a breeding ground for insects or other
vectors.
Provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any property that is zoned RUR,
PRUR, RLD or PRLD that was annexed into the City pursuant to Ordinance No. A-2719, unless and
until such land is rezoned.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §20, 2020)

7.25.302.12 Exterior storage.
Except as specifically permitted by this Section or any other applicable city code, exterior storage is
not allowed.
For property zoned or used for a single-family or two-family residence, exterior storage is
permitted under the applicable provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance or the Overland
Park Municipal Code. The intent is to limit exterior storage to those items specifically permitted
under the applicable zoning district regulations or the applicable accessory use regulations.
Exterior storage shall be subject to the following provisions:
    1. Except for firewood, the storage of approved items shall be within the backyard.
    2. Firewood shall be neatly stacked and free of insects and vermin. Firewood shall be stored in
       the side yard or backyard.
    3. Storage of items shall be substantially screened from view from any adjacent property by a
       wall or fence. When approved by the Code Official, mature landscape material may be
       substituted for a wall or fence.
    4. Items such as barbeque grills, flag poles, play equipment and lawn or patio furniture are
       allowed and need not be screened.
    5. Any exterior storage related to a business is prohibited.
    6. The exterior storage of permitted items shall occupy no more than 20% of the allowable
       outside storage area.




                                                                                              Page 11
For property not zoned or used for a single-family or two-family residential, exterior storage is
limited to that which is permitted under the applicable provisions of the Unified Development
Ordinance or the Overland Park Municipal Code.
Provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to those properties annexed into
the City by either Ordinance No A-2367 or Ordinance No. A-2719 that has a zoning designation
based on the Johnson County Zoning Regulations.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §21, 2020)



7.25.302.13 Rain Barrels.
The City promotes the benefits of the use of rain barrels while recognizing the need to blend their
use into a residential setting. To balance the environmental, drainage and other benefits of rain
barrels with the potential for nuisance, aesthetic or other issues that may result from the use of the
same, rain barrels are permitted in residential districts subject to the following:
    a. One rain barrel per each downspout is allowed on any residential building façade, when said
       rain barrel is:
        1. Approximately 65 gallons or less in capacity;
        2. Screened from view at grade or reasonably blends with the building’s façade and
           surrounding landscaping/vegetation;
        3. Located adjacent to the building envelope;
        4. Not elevated more than 24 inches above adjacent grade, placed on a stable surface, and
           maintained in such a way as to prevent tipping;
        5. Secured with a lid (lids with a designed screen opening are acceptable);
        6. Maintained in a safe and functional condition and kept in good repair; and
        7. Maintained to prevent any offensive odors, any mosquito or other insect eggs and larvae,
           any other nuisance or any other city code violation.
    b. Larger rain barrels or even multiple rain barrels per downspout are allowed when the rain
       barrels are:
        1. Located in the rear yard or side yard behind the front building line;
        2. Screened from view at grade from the right-of-way and any adjacent property;
        3. Placed on a stable surface, and maintained in such a way as to prevent tipping;
        4. Secured with a lid (lids with a designed screen opening are acceptable);
        5. Maintained in a safe and functional condition and kept in good repair; and
        6. Maintained to prevent any offensive odors, any mosquito or other insect eggs and larvae,
           any other nuisance or any other city code violation.
        7. Subject to the 20% of allowable outside storage area calculation set forth in O.P.M.C.
           Section 7.25.302.12.
    c. The Code Official is authorized to interpret the application of the requirements in
       subsections a and b above, and is further authorized to approve reasonable alternative
       requirements that meet the general goal and intent of this Section.




                                                                                             Page 12
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §22, 2020)

7.25.303.1 Swimming Pools
Swimming pools, spa pools, hot tubs and public bathing places shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, in good repair.


The provision of the Johnson County Aquatics Health Code (and amendments thereto) shall apply to
the maintenance of public and semi-public swimming pools, spa pools, hot tubs and public bathing
places and shall be enforced by the Johnson County Department of Health and Environment
(“JCDHE”); and the City consents to and grants JCDHE jurisdiction to enforce the Johnson County
Aquatics Health Code within the City’s corporate boundaries. If there is a discrepancy between an
ordinance adopted by the City of Overland Park and the Johnson County Aquatics Health Code, the
City may enforce the most restrictive provision thereof.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3468 §2, 2024)

7.25.304.2 Protective Treatment.

Exterior Surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, conices, porches,
trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces,
other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or
other protective covering. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces
repainted in a manner that is consistent (colorwise) with the adjoining painted surface. Siding and
masonry joints, as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows,
doors and skylights, shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. Metal surfaces subject
to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion, and surfaces with rust or
corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall
be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designated for stabilization by oxidation are exempt
from this requirement.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §23, 2020)

7.25.304.6 Exterior walls.
Exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained
weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. Exterior walls
shall be maintained free of mold and mildew. Repairs made to exterior walls shall be made of
materials that are compatible with the existing material unless otherwise approved by the code
official.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §24, 2020)

7.25.304.14 Insect screens.




                                                                                            Page 13
During the period from May 15th to October 15th every door, window and other outside opening
required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas
where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of
minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control
shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
      Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains
      or insect repellent fans, are employed.
Where screens, frames for screens, or storm windows are provided, the entire assembly shall be
maintained in a workable condition and in good repair.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §25, 2020)

7.25.308.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
Exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage and any solid waste as defined in Title 7.36 of the Overland
Park Municipal Code.
      308.1.1 Summary Abatement. Whenever the Code Official determines that the
      accumulation of rubbish, garbage or any other solid waste poses an imminent threat or
      substantial risk of being spread, scattered or blown onto neighboring properties or the
      adjacent right-of-way thereby creating a substantial interference with the use and enjoyment
      of said properties, the City may to take immediate action to abate the violation without
      notice.
      308.1.2 Accelerated Abatement. Whenever the Code Official determines that the
      accumulation of rubbish, garbage or any other solid waste appears to be discarded items or
      materials that, by virtue of their nature, amount or composition, create a substantial
      interference with the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties or public property or
      right-of-way, the City may take steps to abate the violation in accordance with the following
      steps:
           1. The Code Official shall post the premises where the materials are located with a notice
              warning that accelerated abatement will occur unless the violation is corrected as
              required. If the tax records indicate that the owner resides at the location and the
              violation is not removed within 24 hours of posting, the Code Official may authorize
              immediate abatement.
           2. If the tax records indicate that the owner resides at a different location in Johnson
              County, the Code Official shall post that location with the same notice. If the violation
              is not removed within 48 hours, the Code Official may authorize immediate
              abatement.
           3. If the tax records indicate that the owner resides outside of Johnson County, the Code
              Official shall send the same notice to the owner’s address by overnight delivery. If the
              violation is not removed within 48 hours of the time of posting, the Code Official may
              authorize immediate abatement, provided the Code Official reasonably believes that at
              least 24 hours has occurred from the anticipated delivery time of the mailed notice.




                                                                                              Page 14
If summary, accelerated or regular abatement is required, the owner shall be responsible for
payment of the cost of the abatement and a notice of cost shall be sent as provided in OPMC Section
7.25.106.5.1.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §26, 2020)



7.25.506.2 Maintenance
Section 506.2 of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby amended to read as follows:


506.2 Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and
be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. The provision of the Johnson County
Environmental Sanitary Code 2025 Edition (and amendments thereto) shall apply to the
maintenance of private sewage disposal systems and shall be enforced by the Johnson County
Department of Health and Environment (“JCDHE”); and the City consents to and grants JCDHE
jurisdiction to enforce the Johnson County Environmental Sanitary Code within the City’s corporate
boundaries.
(History: Ord. No. BC-3466 §4, 2024)

7.25.602.3 Heat supply.
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or
sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall
supply heat during the period from October 15th to May 15th to maintain a temperature of not less
than 68ºF (20ºC) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
      Exceptions:
           1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for
              the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required
              provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter
              outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the
              International Plumbing Code.
           2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30ºF (-1ºC) a minimum
              temperature of 65ºF (18ºC) shall be maintained.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §27, 2020)

7.25.602.4 Occupiable work spaces.
Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from October 15th
to May 15th to maintain a temperature of not less than 65ºF (18ºC) during the period the spaces
are occupied.
      Exceptions:




                                                                                           Page 15
            1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature
               conditions.
            2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §28, 2020)




7.25.606.1 General.
Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with ASME A17.1. The
most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached
to the escalator or dumbwaiter, be available for public inspection in the office of the building
operator or be posted in a publicly conspicuous location approved by the Code Official. The
inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the periodic intervals listed in Table 601.1.
                                                        Table 606.1
                                         Inspection and Test Intervals in “Months”
                                                                                Periodic Test
                             Periodic Inspections
Reference     Equipment                                   Category 1              Category 3    Category 5
 Section        Type        Requirement Interval Requirement Interval Requirement Interval Requirement Inte
             Electric
8.11.2                      8.11.2.1      NA        8.11.2.2       12       N/A            N/A      8.11.2.3    60
             elevators
             Hydraulic
8.11.3                      8.11.3.1      NA        8.11.3.2       12       8.11.3.3                8.11.3.4    60
             elevators
             Escalators
8.11.4       and moving     8.11.4.1      NA        8.11.4.2       12       N/A            N/A      N/A         N/A
             walks
             Sidewalk       8.11.2.1,               8.11.2.2,                                       8.11.2.3,
8.11.5.1                                  NA                       12       8.11.3.3                            60
             elevators      8.11.3.1                8.11.3.2                                        8.11.3.4
             Hand                                                                                   8.11.2.3,
8.11.5.3                    8.11.2.1      12        8.11.2.2       12       N/A            N/A                  60
             elevators                                                                              8.11.3.4
                            8.11.2.1,               8.11.2.2,                                       8.11.2.3,
8.11.5.4     Dumbwaiters                  12                       12       8.11.3.3                            60
                            8.11.3.1                8.11.3.2                                        8.11.3.4
             Material lifts
             and
             dumbwaiters
                            8.11.2.1,               8.11.2.2,                                       8.11.2.3,
8.11.5.5     with                         12                       12       8.11.3.3                            60
                            8.11.3.1                8.11.3.2                                        8.11.3.4
             automatic
             transfer
             devices

(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §29, 2020)




                                                                                              Page 16
7.25.800

Chapter 8 REFERENCE STANDARDS of the International Property Maintenance Code is hereby
amended to omit the reference to IZC - 2018 International Zoning Code.
(History: Ord. No. PM-3289 §30, 2020)




                                                                              Page 17
TITLE 7 - HEALTH AND SANITATION

7.28 IMMEDIATE HAZARDS
Contents:
 7.28.010 Definitions.
 7.28.020 Enforcement.
 7.28.030 Removal and/or Sale.

7.28.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter, shall, for the purpose of this chapter,
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
   A. Enforcing officer means any two of the following officials:
       1. City Manager
       2. City Attorney
       3. Assistant City Attorney
       4. Chief of Police
       5. Lieutenant Colonel of Police
       6. Director of Planning and Development Services
       7. Code Administrator
       8. Environmental Health Officer
       9. Director of Public Works
     10. City Engineer
     11. Fire Chief
   B. Immediate hazard means any condition, or situation constituting a present dangerous or
      unsafe condition requiring immediate action to protect the public.
(History: Ord. IHR-2580 §1, 2005; PD-2372 §11, 2002; ROCR-2245 §11, 2001; IHR-1424 §1, 87;
IHR-377B §1, 71; IHR-377-A §1, 67; IHR-377 §1, 66)

7.28.020 Enforcement.




                                                                                           Page 1
The enforcing officer of the City shall have the power to declare any condition, situation or existing
set of facts to constitute an immediate hazard requiring immediate action to protect the public
whenever, in his opinion, the public health, safety, welfare or morals are presently jeopardized. The
enforcing officer may erect barricades around such immediate hazards, take other actions to
eliminate such immediate hazard, or cause the property on which said immediate hazard is located
to be vacated, taken down, repaired, shored, or otherwise made safe without delay and such action
may be taken without prior notice to or hearings of the owners, agents, lienholders, and occupants.
The cost of such action shall be assessed against the premises on which the immediate hazard is
located.
(History: Ord. IHR-1424 §2, 87; IHR-377 §2, 66)

7.28.030 Removal and/or Sale.
The City shall keep an account of the cost of such work, as set forth in 7.28.020, and may sell the
salvage from such immediate hazard and apply the proceeds or any necessary portion thereof to
pay the cost of removal of such immediate hazard and making the premises safe and secure. If there
is no salvageable material or if money received from the salvage is insufficient to pay the cost of
such work, such cost or any portion thereof in excess of the amounts received from the sale of the
salvage shall be assessed as a special assessment against the parcel of land on which the immediate
hazard was located and the City Clerk shall, at the time of certifying other City taxes, certify the
unpaid portion of the aforesaid costs and the County Clerk shall extend the same on the tax rolls of
the county against said lot or parcel of land.
(History: Ord. IHR-377 §3, 66)




                                                                                              Page 2
TITLE 7 - HEALTH AND SANITATION

7.32 RAT CONTROL
Contents:
 7.32.010 Definitions.
 7.32.020 Ratproofing Business Buildings Required.
 7.32.030 Compliance with Notice to Ratproof Required.
 7.32.040 Time Period Allowed for Compliance with Ratproofing Notice.
 7.32.050 Maintenance of Ratproof Conditions.
 7.36.060 Inspections.
 7.32.070 Closing Business for Conditions Conducive to Rat Harborage.
 7.32.080 Condemnation and Destruction of Noncomplying Buildings.
 7.32.090 Failure to Restore Ratproof Condition or to Leave Openings.
 7.32.100 Structures to Conform to Regulations.
 7.32.110 Conformance with Regulations Where Foodstuffs Are Handled.
 7.32.120 Storage of Food and Feed.
 7.32.130 Storage of Refuse.
 7.32.140 Accumulations of Garbage.
 7.32.150 Storage of Lumber, Bottles and Related Materials.
 7.32.160 Violation - Penalty.

7.32.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
    A. Administrator means the Administrator, Environmental Health, or his\her designee.
    B. Business buildings means any structure, whether public or private that is adapted for
       occupancy for transaction of business, for rendering of professional service, for amusement,
       for the display, sale or storage of goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the performance of
       work or labor, including hotels, apartment buildings, tenement houses, rooming houses,
       office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, grain elevators,
       abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, factories, and all outhouses, sheds, barns, and other
       structures on premises used for business purposes;
    C. Occupant means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall be in actual
       possession of any improved real property, either as owner or as a tenant, either with or
       without the consent of the owner thereof.




                                                                                           Page 1
    D. Owner means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, has legal title to, or
       sufficient proprietary interest in, or has charge, care or control of any improved real
       property, as title holder, as employee or agent of the title holder, or as landlord or manager
       or as trustee or guardian of the estate or person of the title holder.
    E. Rat eradication means the elimination or extermination of rats within buildings by any or
       all of the accepted measures, such as: poisoning, fumigation, or trapping;
    F. Rat harborage means any condition which provides shelter or protection for rats, thus
       favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under, or outside of any structure;
    G. Rat proofing as used in this chapter applies to a form of construction to prevent the ingress
       of rats into business buildings from the exterior, or from one business building or
       establishment to another. It consists essentially of treatment with material impervious to rat
       gnawing, all actual or potential openings, in exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements,
       roofs and foundations, that may be reached by climbing or by burrowing.
(History: Ord. RAT-1715 §1, 91; RAT-418 §1, 67)

7.32.020 Ratproofing Business Buildings Required.
It is required that all business buildings in the City shall be rat-proof, freed of rats, and maintained
in a rat-proof and rat-free condition to the satisfaction of the Administrator.
(History: Ord. RAT-1715 §2, 91; RAT-418 §2, 67)

7.32.030 Compliance with Notice to Ratproof Required.
Upon receipt of a written notice or order from the Administrator, the owner of any business
building specified therein shall take immediate measures for rat proofing the building, and unless
the work and improvements have been completed by the owner in the time specified in the written
notice, or within the time to which a written extension may have been granted by the
Administrator, then the owner shall be deemed guilty of an offense under the provisions of these
regulations.
(History: Ord. RAT-1715 §3, 91; RAT-418 §3, 67)

7.32.040 Time Period Allowed for Compliance with Ratproofing Notice.
Whenever the Administrator gives a written notice to the occupant of a business building that there
is evidence of rat infestation of the building, the occupant shall, upon receipt or posting of that
notice, immediately institute rat-eradication measures and shall continuously maintain such
measures in a satisfactory manner until the premises is declared by the Administrator to be free of
rat infestation.
(History: Ord. RAT-1715 §4, 91; RAT-418 §4, 67)

7.32.050 Maintenance of Ratproof Conditions.




                                                                                                Page 2
The owners of all rat proofed business buildings are required to maintain the premises in a rat
proof condition and to repair all breaks or leaks that may occur in the rat proofing without a
specific order of the Administrator.
(History: Ord. RAT-1715 §5, 91; RAT-418 §5, 67)

7.36.060 Inspections.
The Administrator is empowered to make routine, administrative inspections of the interior and
exterior of business buildings to determine evidence of rat infestation and the existence of new
breaks in their rat proofing and, when any evidence is found indicating the presence of rats or
openings through which rats may again enter business buildings, require the owners or occupants
to abate the conditions found.
(History: Ord. RAT-1715 §6, 91; RAT-418 §6, 67)

7.32.070 Closing Business for Conditions Conducive to Rat Harborage.
Whenever conditions inside or under occupied businesses, in the opinion of the Administrator,
provide extensive harborage for rats, the Administrator is empowered, after due notification in
accordance with 7.32.030, to close such business buildings until such time as the conditions are
abated by rat proofing and harborage removal, including if necessary, the installation of suitable
concrete floors in basements or replacement of wooden first or ground floors with concrete or
other major repairs necessary to facilitate rat eradication.
(History: Ord. RAT-1715 §7, 91; RAT-418 §7, 67)

7.32.080 Condemnation and Destruction of Noncomplying Buildings.
Whenever conditions inside or under unoccupied business buildings, in the opinion of the
Administrator, provide extensive harborage for rats the Administrator is empowered to require
compliance with the provisions of 7.32.030, and, in the event that the conditions are not corrected
in a period of 60 days, or within the time to which a written extension may have been granted by
the Administrator, the Administrator is empowered to institute condemnation and destruction
proceedings.
(History: Ord. RAT-1715 §8, 91; RAT-418 §8, 67)

7.32.090 Failure to Restore Ratproof Condition or to Leave Openings.
It is unlawful under the provisions of this chapter for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility
company, plumber, or any other person to remove and fail to restore in like condition
the ratproofing from any business building for any purpose. Further, it is unlawful for any person or
agent to make any new openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats.
(History: Ord. RAT-418 §9, 67)

7.32.100 Structures to Conform to Regulations.




                                                                                               Page 3
It is unlawful for any person to construct, repair, or remodel any building, dwelling, stable, or
market, or other structure whatsoever, unless such construction, repair, remodeling or installation
renders the building or other structure rat proof in accordance with the regulations prescribed in
this chapter. The provisions of this section apply only to such construction, repairs, remodeling, or
installation that affects the rat proof condition of any building or other structure.
(History: Ord. RAT-1715 §9, 91; RAT-418 §10, 67)

7.32.110 Conformance with Regulations Where Foodstuffs Are Handled.
It is unlawful for any person to occupy any new or existing business buildings wherein foodstuffs
are to be stored, kept, handled, sold, held, or offered for sale without complying with 7.32.100; and
unless the provisions of this section are complied with, no City license or permit to conduct or carry
on such business as defined in this chapter will be issued.
(History: Ord. RAT-1715 §10, 91; RAT-418 §11, 67)

7.32.120 Storage of Food and Feed.
    A. All food and feed within the City for feeding chickens, cows, pigs, horses, and other animals
       shall be stored in rat-free and ratproof containers, compartments, or rooms unless stored in
       a ratproof building.
    B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property that is zoned RUR, PRUR, RLD
       or PRLD and that was annexed into the City pursuant to Ordinance No. A-2719, unless and
       until such land is rezoned.
(History: Ord. RAT-2723 §1, 2008; RAT-418 §12, 67)

7.32.130 Storage of Refuse.
    A. Within the corporate limits of the City, all garbage or refuse consisting of waste animal or
       vegetable matter upon which rats may feed, and all small dead animals, shall be placed and
       stored until collected in covered metal containers of a type prescribed by the Administrator.
       It is further unlawful for any person to dump or place on any premises, land, or waterway,
       any dead animals, or any waste vegetation or animal matter of any kind.
    B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property that is zoned RUR, PRUR, RLD
       or PRLD that was annexed into the City pursuant to Ordinance No. A-2719, unless and until
       such land is rezoned.
(History: Ord. RAT-2724 §1, 2008; RAT-1715 §11, 91; RAT-418 §13, 67)

7.32.140 Accumulations of Garbage.
    A. It is unlawful for any person to place, leave, dump, or permit to accumulate any solid waste,
       including, without limitation, any garbage, rubbish, or trash in any building or on any
       premises, improved or vacant, or on any open lot or alley in the City so that same shall or
       may afford food or harborage for rats.
    B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any property that is zoned RUR, PRUR, RLD
